---
id: 57a1b3e2b236a6d9208d9536
uri: treatment/radiotherapy/application
title: Clinical application
type: level1
surtitle: Radiotherapy
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-08-23T12:05:50Z
created_at: 2016-08-03T09:05:38Z
---

<p>The use of ionizing (high energy) radiation for therapeutic use
    in oncology dates from the end of the 19th century after
    the discovery of radium by Marie and Pierre Curie. It is
    an effective and important treatment modality in head and
    neck cancer.</p>
<p>It works on the principle of rapidly dividing cells (e.g. cancer
    cells) being selectively destroyed by exposure to high-energy
    irradiation. Cells exposed to ionizing radiation form free
    radicals intracellularly because the energy of the irradiation
    is high enough to break up molecules in the cell. This causes
    denaturation of large molecules including DNA and other vital
    molecular components of living cells. Although most of the
    changes are not apparent immediately, any attempt at division
    (to form new cells or repair cell injury) will result in
    mitotic cell death because the cell’s molecular machinery
    is no longer functioning properly. Rapidly dividing cells
    are most vulnerable, in particular most cancer cells and
    normal fast proliferating tissues such as mucosa and skin.</p>
<p>The <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy/application/more-info">unwanted effects of radiotherapy</a>    can be divided into acute reactions and delayed effects with
    long-term late damage. Such effects are dose dependent. The
    efficacy of irradiation on tumour cells depends on their
    radiosensitivity (e.g. sarcoma is less sensitive than carcinoma),
    the oxygenation level of the tissue (higher levels of oxygen
    help to create free radicals in the cells) and the tumour
    volume (small volume tumours will be better controlled than
    large tumours)</p>
<p>There are <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy/application/more-info">three ways radiotherapy can be administered</a>    – teletherapy (external beam), brachytherapy (radiation source
    placed within or close to tumour) and radioactive isotopes
    injected systemically and taken up by cancer cells (e.g.
    used in thyroid cancer where radioactive iodine isotopes
    selectively accumulate in the thyroid gland). In oral cancer,
    only the first two delivery methods are used. In more recent
    attempts to minimise unwanted radiotherapy effects, sophisticated
    protocols are being developed to deliver external beam radiation
    more selectively to the target area (<a href="/treatment/radiotherapy/application/more-info">IMRT</a>).</p>
<p>In order to ensure that over a course of irradiation sessions
    the radiation is consistently and precisely delivered in
    a highly controlled manner this involves a planning CT scan
    and the creation of a close fitting transparent mask which
    is fitted to both your face and the table you lie on ensuring
    there is no inadvertent movement during the brief period
    the radiotherapy is being delivered.</p>
