---
id: 57ab4e02c67806ac0311c2aa
uri: treatment/surgery
title: A–Z of surgery
type: directory
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-06-14T21:56:05Z
created_at: 2016-08-10T15:53:38Z
---

<p>For most of the items on the long and varied list of oral and
    maxillofacial conditions, surgery is at least one, in some
    cases the only, treatment option. It is not without irony
    that for many potential <a href="/treatment/surgery/postoperative-problems">postoperative problems</a>    more surgery is the primary treatment and/or salvage option.</p>
<p>In this section A-Z of surgery we will mention nonsurgical treatment
    options where appropriate. Similarly, sections dealing with
    <a href="/treatment/other">other, nonsurgical treatments</a>    such as medication will refer back to surgical options where
    appropriate.</p>
<p>We include a chapter about <a href="/treatment/surgery/anaesthesia">anaesthesia</a>    in this section about surgery: the discipline of anaesthesia
    is the great enabling technique for minor and major surgery,
    and for intensive care. Some special anaesthesia considerations
    and techniques are necessary in conjunction with (major)
    oral and maxillofacial surgery.</p>
<p>You may be faced with having to make decisions about a range
    of treatment options. Especially in situations where you
    may have to consider potentially life-changing interventions
    and outcomes, a full and honest picture of <i>all</i> options
    is essential for making the right, informed individual decision.
    You will be supported through this process but it is important
    to truly grasp that the decision is yours – and that requires
    you to be well informed. This includes not only understanding
    the treatment processes but also having <a href="/treatment/timelines">realistic expectations</a>    about time-lines and outcomes.</p>
