---
id: 57ab4df2c67806ac0311c2a9
uri: help/physiotherapy
title: Physiotherapy
type: directory
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-10-27T18:54:57Z
created_at: 2016-08-10T15:53:22Z
---

<p>While your surgeon has done his or her best to repair your body,
    this will likely have involved some element of “robbing Peter
    to pay Paul”. All sites of surgery are essentially damaged
    – with the best of intent. It is <i>your</i> job to help
    minimising the effects of that damage. Other, non-surgical
    treatment modalities (such as radiotherapy) also cause tissue
    damage. Again, it is <i>your</i> job to help minimise the
    effects of that, different kind, of damage.</p>
<p>Physiotherapy can be amazingly effective in this regard and we
    urge you to help yourself by making use of it. We explain
    <a href="/help/physiotherapy/how-and-why">how a fair range of exercises works</a>.
    The main part of this section are <a href="/help/physiotherapy/videos">video demonstrations</a>    of a range of generally useful exercises; addressing short
    and long term issues. We deal with exercises for surgical
    donor sites all over the body and with head &amp; neck sites,
    as well as exercises to address <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy-related problems</a>    (such as trismus, stiff neck or lymphoedema).</p>
<p>Any remaining or more specific problems that cannot be sufficiently
    addressed by the suggested exercises (plus some patience
    and perseverance) will best be dealt with in dedicated 1:1
    sessions with a specialist physiotherapist. Different physiotherapists
    may prefer and recommend slightly different exercises.</p>
