---
id: 57ac8a812252dec307957922
uri: help/magic-triangle
title: Magic triangle self-assessment
type: directory
order: 0
further_reading_uri: help/magic-triangle/further-reading
updated_at: 2017-07-10T16:10:44Z
created_at: 2016-08-11T14:24:01Z
---

<p>As you progress along a timeline from being diagnosed to the
    stage where you have become accustomed to your new life it
    might be helpful to have a series of stepping stones to judge
    your progress.</p>
<p>Researchers in the area known as Quality of Life research, which
    includes feedback sometimes known as Patient Reported Outcome
    Measures, often try to measure the problems that are important
    to you using questionnaires.</p>
<p>These are usually quantified using scales (1-4, 1-5 or 1-10).
    The idea is to try and semi-objectively quantify what is
    important to you and, if possible, address that.</p>
<p>Questionnaires are used repeatedly throughout our lives and in
    all areas of our activity. You may well have become tired
    of filling in questionnaires, no matter how useful the set
    of questions may be and no matter how willing you are to
    acknowledge their usefulness. Being mindful of widespread
    questionnaire fatigue but being aware this is an important
    part of optimal aftercare we have considered an alternative.</p>
<p>The principle idea is to help you to reflect on your current
    state of affairs and/or to prepare for outpatient clinic
    appointments. Our tool is designed such that it should be
    intuitive to use.</p>
<p><a href="/magic-triangle" class="start"><strong>Start here</strong></a></p>
<aside>
    <p>Our <a href="/help/magic-triangle/text.pdf">alternative tool</a>        exploits the mathematical properties of an <a href="/help/magic-triangle/appendix.pdf">equilateral triangle</a>        which forms the (invisible) basis of our interactive
        self-assessment tool. The interactive assessment tool
        (a triangle) is a graphical representation of how much
        common post treatment issues affect you.</p>
</aside>
