---
id: 5846cacb51fd935279ebd7fe
uri: treatment/other/hyperbaric-oxygen
title: Hyperbaric oxygen
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-11-09T13:52:29Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T14:27:23Z
---

<p>Treatment with hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) involves breathing concentrated
    oxygen gas at higher than normal atmospheric pressure. This
    treatment happens in a closed chamber in which both composition
    and pressure of the atmosphere can be controlled. Such HBO
    treatment chambers are equipped to either host a number of
    people or a single person for a session. If a course of HBO
    sessions has been prescribed for you, it will usually mean
    having to travel to places where this treatment is available.</p>
<p>The HBO approach is probably best known as a well-established
    treatment for decompression sickness of scuba divers and
    to counteract carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning.</p>
<p>HBO treatment is based on the idea that at elevated pressure
    more oxygen molecules will be dissolved in body fluids. It
    is thought that this (temporarily) increased oxygen concentration
    may stimulate the function of damaged cells, in particular
    in tissues that are suffering from reduced blood supply.
    The main clinical applications for HBO are the treatment
    of some <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">severe infections</a>    and <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis">bone necrosis</a>.
    In some cases HBO has been used as a precaution to avoid
    bone necrosis resulting from dental treatments such as tooth
    extractions after <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>    in the head and neck region.</p>
<p>The outcome of a large prospective randomized trial known as
    <a href="/treatment/other/further-reading">HOPON</a> is now
    (2018) published.</p>
