---
id: 5846a9c6506cd85372ce24ae
uri: diagnosis/a-z/craniofacial-anomalies
title: Craniofacial anomalies
type: level1
description: Skull and face syndromes
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell & Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-02-01T12:18:12Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:06:30Z
---

<p>The most common craniofacial malformations, comprising 65 % of
    all craniofacial anomalies, are clefts of the lip and palate.
    These are common (with an incidence of approximately 1 :
    500 to 1 : 1000 live births) and differ from the remaining
    malformations. Clefts of lip and palate do not involve the
    skull, facial bones or brain as other malformations do (however,
    some other craniofacial anomalies include clefts of lip and
    palate). Given these differences, the <a href="/treatment/surgery/craniofacial-anomalies">management and treatment for clefts of lip and palate</a>    differs from that of other craniofacial malformations and
    we discuss these conditions separately.</p>
<aside>
    <p>If you’d like to read more about clefts of lip and palate,
        this information is in our sections about <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/cleft-lip-palate">diagnosis</a>,
        <a href="/treatment/surgery/cleft-lip-palate">treatment</a>        and <a href="/treatment/timelines/cleft-lip-palate">timelines &amp; outcomes</a>        for clefts of lip and palate.</p>
</aside>
<p>Other craniofacial anomalies are usually one of several, sometimes
    the only, expression, of a multitude of rare congenital (inherited
    and sporadic) conditions. The severity of the various conditions
    ranges from very mild cases (with hardly any, or no, need
    of treatment) across the spectrum to life-threatening conditions
    in need of immediate surgical intervention(s) at birth.</p>
<p>The <a href="/treatment/surgery/cleft-lip-palate">management and treatment of clefts of lip and palate</a>    is a long-term undertaking where the surgical arm (mainly
    in collaboration with <a href="/treatment/surgery/ectopic-teeth">orthodontics</a>    (taking care of dentition) and possibly <a href="/treatment/surgery/facial-appearance">facial soft tissue surgery</a>)
    is firmly in the oral and maxillofacial area of expertise.
    In contrast, the <a href="/treatment/surgery/craniofacial-anomalies">management and treatment of most of the other craniofacial anomalies</a>    requires a broader multidisciplinary approach with specialist
    paediatricians, neurosurgeons and other clinical disciplines
    involved, and oral and maxillofacial surgery being part of
    such a team approach.</p>
