---
id: 5846b146506cd85372ce3d35
uri: diagnosis/a-z/postoperative-problems/lower-arm
title: Lower arm
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-05-21T11:31:01Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:38:30Z
---

<p>Postoperative problems affecting the lower arm include</p>
<ul>
    <li>The usual maxillofacial reasons for surgery on the lower
        arm will be harvesting of a <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">radial forearm free flap</a>        (or much less often an ulnar forearm flap). Some surgeons
        maximise the use of this donor site and also harvest
        a full thickness skin graft from the same forearm to
        repair the defect created by harvesting the radial flap.</li>
    <li>Scars. The lower arm is visible in many cultures and there
        will be visible scars. These can be minimised by using
        subcuticular suturing and a variety of repair techniques
        but there will be scarring.</li>
    <li>If a radial forearm flap has been raised the radial artery
        is removed as part of the flap. This means the radial
        pulse (the commonest site for taking the pulse) will
        probably not be palpable (there is a small pressure pulse
        created by backflow through the palmar arch). The same
        applies to the ulnar artery. Before raising these flaps,
        an assessment is made to ensure the hand and digits will
        not be damaged by the removal of the major arteries and
        associated veins.</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies">Altered sensation</a>.
        The superficial branch of the radial nerve is manipulated
        during the dissection to raise the radial flap. It is
        quite common to have some altered sensation over the
        area of the thumb base (thenar eminence). In the short
        term an itchy sensation there and over the whole forearm
        will be noticed, but usually doesn’t become a big problem.</li>
    <li>Grip strength. This is only noticeably affected in the first
        month post-operatively (the time when heavy dressings
        are used and limited hand mobility encouraged to help
        the skin graft take). It is normal to use the non-dominant
        hand for raising the flap for this reason.</li>
</ul>
<aside>
    <p>Read about possible remedies for these problems in our section
        about <a href="/treatment/surgery/postoperative-problems">treatment of postoperative problems</a>.</p>
</aside>
