---
id: 5846b011506cd85372ce3d26
uri: diagnosis/a-z/postoperative-problems/lower-jaw
title: Lower jaw
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-05-21T11:31:42Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:33:21Z
---

<p>Postoperative problems affecting the lower jaw (mandible) include</p>
<ul>
    <li>Immediate: bleeding. The mandible has an excellent blood
        supply from the inferior alveolar vessels which run with
        a major nerve bundle (inferior alveolar nerve) through
        the ramus and body of the mandible (the back bit) from
        an entry hole on the inside (marked by a bony prominence
        called the lingula) to an exit hole on the lateral (outside)
        aspect of the body of the mandible (nearer the front).
        A smaller bundle of nerves and vessels continue through
        the bone to connect with the opposite side. A further
        blood supply comes from the enveloping periosteum. Any
        operation on the bottom jaw, from tooth removal to resection,
        can bleed despite taking many precautions during the
        operation.</li>
    <li>Pain is likely if there is <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/more-info">inflammation</a>        of the bone, <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">infection</a>        of the bone or <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/fracture">mobility</a>        of the bone.</li>
    <li>Malocclusion: if the bone holding the teeth is in the wrong
        place, for example after a <a href="/treatment/surgery/fracture">repair of a fracture</a>,
        then the teeth will not meet in the way they did before
        the injury or operation.</li>
    <li>Swelling: any operation on a bone will produce swelling but
        because of the proximity of the airway this is of more
        significance with some bones than with some other bones.</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies">Altered sensation</a>:
        for the reasons given above in bleeding. The main nerve
        to the lower lip runs from side to side in the mandible.
        Injury to the bone, surgery to repair that injury, or
        surgery that removes or divides the mandible can result
        in various forms of nerve damage.</li>
</ul>
<aside>
    <p>Read about possible remedies for these problems in our section
        about <a href="/treatment/surgery/postoperative-problems">treatment of postoperative problems</a>.</p>
</aside>
