---
id: 5846b174506cd85372ce3d39
uri: diagnosis/a-z/postoperative-problems/abdomen
title: Abdomen
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-08-18T12:59:57Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:39:16Z
---

<p>Postoperative problems affecting the abdomen (belly) include</p>
<ul>
    <li>Scars. The main maxillofacial reasons for the abdomen being
        interfered with are
        <ul>
            <li>placement of a <a href="/help/non-oral-food">feeding gastrostomy tube</a></li>
            <li><a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">maxillofacial reconstructive surgery</a>                harvesting soft tissue in the abdominal region;
                either an abdominal full thickness skin graft
                or a rectus abdominis free flap (the rectus abdominis
                muscle is a long, flat group of muscles running
                along the whole middle front of the abdomen –
                the ‘six pack’ muscles).</li>
        </ul>Each of these will leave a scar on the abdominal wall.
        Gastrostomy (sometimes called a PEG, percutaneous endoscopic
        gastrostomy) is a small puncture wound in the upper left
        abdominal wall. Abdominal full thickness skin grafts
        are usually harvested from the side of the abdominal
        wall (preferably not the lower right as this can be confused
        with an appendicectomy scar). The rectus abdominis flap
        for <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">head and neck reconstruction</a>        is done in a variety of shapes but usually lies vertically
        on one side of the abdomen (in contrast to the transverse
        rectus abdominis (or TRAM) flap popular in breast reconstruction).</li>
    <li>It is important to be aware that of these interventions only
        the gastrostomy actually penetrates the abdominal wall,
        goes inside and connects to the contents of the stomach.
        This carries the risk of leakage or formation of an abnormal
        connection, a <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/fistula">fistula</a>.
        So, in some respects the smallest of these scars on the
        abdomen can be the potentially more dangerous one.</li>
    <li>The skin graft only affects the skin and may be itchy or
        prominent but has little else in the way of complications
        and is rarely infected.</li>
    <li>The rectus abdominus flap can be carried out in different
        ways but for <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">maxillofacial reconstructive purposes</a>        usually takes out the muscle, fascia and blood vessel
        supplying the muscle and skin. This resulting defect
        is repaired locally and can make the abdominal wall feel
        very tight for weeks after. This can make it difficult
        to cough and thus can predispose to chest infections.
        Rarely hernias can occur. Sometimes a mesh is used to
        strengthen the abdominal wall but in very thin patients
        (where this flap is more often used in maxillofacial
        reconstruction), the mesh can work its way out of the
        scar. Full abdominal wall strength is very unlikely to
        recover in these cases.</li>
</ul>
<p>The deep inferior epigastric free flap (DIEP flap) is an alternative
    but more complicated version of the operation. It attempts
    to reduce the issues with other types of rectus abdominis
    free flaps but is more often used in young women who may
    wish to give birth after breast reconstruction than for older
    maxillofacial patients with <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/cancer">advanced head and neck cancers</a>    needing large soft tissue defects repaired after tumour excision.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about possible remedies for these problems in our section
        about <a href="/treatment/surgery/postoperative-problems">treatment of postoperative problems</a>.</p>
</aside>
