---
id: 5846c01951fd935279ebd713
uri: diagnosis/drugs/fitness
title: Fitness
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Lee Mellor; Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald and David A. Mitchell
order: 0
further_reading_uri: diagnosis/drugs/further-reading
updated_at: 2018-11-09T13:18:02Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T13:41:45Z
---

<h2>Fitness in general</h2>
<p>Many people will have their own idea of what they believe physical
    fitness to be. It can be defined as a state of health and
    well-being and, more specifically, the ability to perform
    aspects of sports, occupations and daily activities. Well-being
    includes physical as well as <a href="/help/mental-health">mental health</a>    and <a href="/help/oral-food">eating well</a> is as important
    a contributor to well-being as is physical activity.</p>
<p>Increasing physical activity has the potential to improve the
    physical and mental health and well-being of individuals,
    families, communities and a nation as a whole. For example,
    according to <a href="https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/213740/dh_128145.pdf">physical activity guidelines for adults</a>    from the UK Chief Medical Officers, adults should aim to
    take part in at least 150 minutes of moderate intensity physical
    activity each week, in bouts of 10 minutes or more. Moderate
    intensity physical activities, such as brisk walking or cycling,
    cause adults to get warmer and breathe harder and their hearts
    to beat faster, but they can still carry on a conversation.</p>
<h2>Fitness and disease</h2>
<p>There is growing evidence for the positive role of physical activity
    during and after treatment for a variety of different chronic
    long term conditions and diseases. In many acute conditions
    pre-emptive fitness levels can have a positive effect on
    rehabilitation as well as being beneficial for many types
    of major surgeries and <a href="/treatment/surgery/anaesthesia">general anaesthesia</a>.</p>
<p>Physical activity can improve, or prevent decline of, fitness
    and assist in the improvement of physical function and fitness.
    Physical activity may be broadly and generally defined and/or
    include specific and targeted exercises in <a href="/help/physiotherapy">physiotherapy</a>.</p>
<p>Evidence suggests that improved fitness and physical activity
    may reduce the risk of disease recurrence and potential relapse.
    Good levels of fitness and physical activity can help maintain
    independence and promote well-being at advanced stages of
    illness.</p>
<p>It is advisable to gradually build up to the health-related physical
    activity guidelines for the general population. The evidence
    shows that if an activity recommendation is carefully tailored
    to the individual, it is likely to have a positive impact.</p>
<p>Fatigue is a common symptom of many diseases and long term conditions
    and/or treatments. The exact causes of fatigue in patients
    is often unknown: it may be caused by the disease itself
    or its treatment, or a combination of both. It may be the
    result of psychological and physiological responses, or it
    may result from deconditioning due to further reduction of
    physical activity. There is evidence that exercise is beneficial
    in the management of fatigue, including treatment periods.</p>
<h2>Prehabilitation</h2>
<p>There is a growing body of evidence in support of optimising
    health and fitness of people before the start of acute treatments.
    This is true for different treatment modalities (surgery,
    radiotherapy, chemotherapy), for malignant and non-malignant
    conditions, and for patients of all ages.</p>
<p>Such attempts are known as prehabilitation (or prehab, for short).
    Prehabilitation aims to prevent or reduce the severity of
    anticipated treatment-related impairments that may cause
    significant disability. Preliminary evidence suggests that
    following an appropriate exercise programme before treatment
    (prehabilitation) leads to increased cardiorespiratory fitness,
    fewer postoperative complications and shorter hospital admissions.</p>
<p>The exact nature of such tailored pre-treatment exercise schemes
    is defined by the underlying condition and the planned treatment.
    For example, optimised schemes ahead of elective orthopaedic
    surgery such as knee or hip replacement in otherwise healthy
    people will be different from those that are most suitable
    for people with multiple co-morbidities ahead of major maxillofacial
    surgery (surgical prehabilitaton schemes are well established
    in orthopaedic surgery in many places).</p>
<p>Any attempts to engage with pre-treatment improvement of fitness
    should see prehabilitation in conjunction with efforts to
    support <a href="/diagnosis/drugs/overview">cessation of drug abuse</a>    as the extensive use of many recreational drugs negatively
    interferes with treatment(s) and/or recovery.</p>
