---
id: 5846ca2051fd935279ebd7fc
uri: treatment/chemotherapy/chemical-principles
title: Chemical principles
type: level1
surtitle: Chemotherapy
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-08-23T12:04:57Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T14:24:32Z
---

<p>Chemotherapy is treatment by medication which is fundamentally
    poisonous to all cell types but affects cancerous cells more
    due to their faster growth rate. Unlike healthy adult cells,
    which multiply relatively slowly, malignant cells are characterised
    by unchecked rapid cell division. Medication treatments aim
    to exploit this difference to target mainly malignant cells
    and therefore shrink the tumour. The ideal situation would
    be the death of all the cancer cells and survival of all
    normal cells. It rarely works out that well.</p>
<p>Although affecting cancerous cells more severely, chemotherapies
    can also act on healthy cells due to the inherent cell toxicity
    of all drugs used in chemotherapies. Consequently side effects
    often occur, such as hair loss and fatigue, however accompanying
    treatments may alleviate some of these issues.</p>
<aside>
    <p>If you want to know more about accompanying treatments, you
        can read more on our <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy/application/detailed">detailed pages about clinical applications of chemotherapy</a>.</p>
</aside>
<p>A variety of chemotherapy drugs exist that are classified according
    to how they work. Classes include so-called DNA crosslinking
    agents, antimetabolites and different forms of protein inhibitors.</p>
<p>DNA crosslinking agents interfere with genetic material found
    within every cell. Antimetabolites cause cell death by mimicking
    and consequently replacing the molecules needed for cell
    growth. Finally, protein inhibitors interact with structures
    in the cell and prevent them from functioning.</p>
