---
id: 5846ac45506cd85372ce3d14
uri: diagnosis/a-z/facial-pain-syndrome
title: Facial pain syndrome
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-08-18T16:19:18Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:17:09Z
---

<p>Being in pain is undoubtedly a strong motivation to attend a
    maxillofacial clinic. Numerous disorders and conditions are
    associated with pain in the mouth, jaws or face as a prominent
    symptom. Often this will be acute pain, for example caused
    by an <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">infection</a>,
    by a <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/fracture">fracture</a>    or by a <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/oral-mucosal-lesion">mouth ulcer</a>.</p>
<p>Such cases of acute pain are not what is usually covered by the
    term ‘facial pain’, or ‘facial pain syndrome’. This term
    includes conditions where more often than not the cause of
    the pain is unknown (idiopathic pain), the pain tends to
    be chronic, and it has a complicated role (acting both as
    a symptom and as a condition). It is not always possible
    to arrive at a precise diagnosis for facial pain (hence the
    condition is also referred to as facial pain syndrome, a
    medical buzzword for poorly defined conditions). Even if
    it isn’t always possible to precisely diagnose facial pain
    syndrome, the pain is real and needs attention. If no concrete
    diagnosis can be made, it is still necessary to exclude as
    many underlying causes as possible to make sure that vague
    pain is not a symptom of a serious underlying condition.
    A thorough medical history and examination will go a long
    way in this direction; where necessary follow-up appointments
    will continue to monitor the condition (and the effects of
    any <a href="/treatment/surgery/facial-pain-syndrome">treatments</a>).</p>
<p>Roughly speaking, facial pain syndrome can be described by four
    major symptom complexes :</p>
<ul>
    <li>Facial arthromyalgia (jaw joint pain, or <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/jaw-joint">temporomandibular joint (TMJ) dysfunction syndrome</a>)</li>
    <li>Atypical facial pain (non-joint or muscle pain)</li>
    <li>Atypical odontalgia (toothache without identifiable dental
        cause)</li>
    <li>Oral <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies">dysaesthesia</a>        (oral sensory disturbances).</li>
</ul>
