---
id: 5846ac97506cd85372ce3d16
uri: diagnosis/a-z/jaw-disproportion
title: Jaw disproportion
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-05-21T11:10:14Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:18:31Z
---

<p>Jaw disproportion is a term that specifically summarises a number
    of developmental conditions where disproportionate growth
    of the jaw bones results in malocclusion, the misalignment
    of teeth (malocclusion can also occur purely from dental
    misalignment, without disproportionate growth of the jaw
    bones).</p>
<p>Jaw disproportion conditions include</p>
<ul>
    <li>mandibular hypoplasia (the lower jaw is too small) results
        in overbite;</li>
    <li>maxillary hypoplasia (the upper jaw is too small) results
        in underbite;</li>
    <li>mandibular hyperplasia (the lower jaw is too big) results
        in underbite;</li>
    <li>anterior open bite (the front teeth of the upper and lower
        jaws have no contact);</li>
    <li>vertical discrepancies (the upper jaw bone has too much downward
        growth);</li>
    <li>bimaxillary retrusion (both upper and lower jaw are disproportionately
        small relative to the rest of the facial skeleton).</li>
</ul>
<p>The severity of these conditions varies from very minor (with
    no need for treatment), to medium (where orthodontic treatment
    alone, to better align the teeth but leave the jaw bones
    untreated, may be the best option), to severe (where surgical
    correction of the jaw bones is required; this branch of surgery
    is called orthognathic surgery). Orthodontics, non-surgical
    methods to align teeth by braces and similar, is not further
    discussed on this website as it is a completely separate
    although closely related dental specialty. However, orthognathic
    surgery almost always includes orthodontic treatment before
    and/or after surgery.</p>
<p>Depending on the severity of jaw disproportion conditions, problems
    with biting and chewing, speech and breathing (for example,
    sleep apnoea) may be encountered in addition to issues with
    facial imbalance and appearance.</p>
<p>Assessment of these conditions requires not only an in-depth
    <a href="/diagnosis/tests/medical-history">medical history</a>    and <a href="/diagnosis/tests/examination">examination</a>.
    In addition, photography and special <a href="/diagnosis/tests/x-ray">X-ray</a>    images, careful measurements of the facial proportions and
    study models (made from dental impressions using alginate
    or silicone moulds) are all necessary for treatment planning.
    It is important that an informed decision is made about treatment
    because a successful outcome of orthognathic surgery / orthodontics
    treatments requires long-term commitment and engagement by
    the patient.</p>
<p>Disproportionate jaw conditions that lead to asymmetry of the
    facial skeleton are not discussed in this section but are
    included in our section about <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/craniofacial-anomalies">craniofacial anomalies</a>.
    Strictly speaking, all jaw disproportions are a sub-category
    of craniofacial (developmental) anomalies.  </p>
<p>It is not uncommon that people with <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/jaw-joint">chronic jaw joint (TMJ, temperomandibular joint) pain</a>    are referred to a maxillofacial clinic for consideration
    of orthognathic surgical interventions. There is little evidence
    that surgical correction of malocclusion alleviates jaw joint
    pain and dysfunction.</p>
