---
id: 5846a985506cd85372ce24ab
uri: diagnosis/a-z/cancer/facial-skin
title: Facial skin cancer
type: level1
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell & Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-08-23T11:53:27Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:05:25Z
contents:
  - text: "Basal cell carcinoma, BCC"
    id: basal-cell-carcinoma-bcc
  - text: "Squamous cell carcinoma, SCC"
    id: squamous-cell-carcinoma-scc
  - text: "Malignant melanoma"
    id: malignant-melanoma
---

<p>The three most common skin cancers affecting the head and neck
    region are basal cell carcinoma (BCC), squamous cell carcinoma
    (SCC) and malignant melanoma. Exposure to ultraviolet (UV)
    light on a cumulative basis is the major risk factor for
    BCC and SCC. Therefore, unsurprisingly, these are most commonly
    found on the sun exposed skin (such as face, scalp, hands
    and arms of the white skinned population in sunny climates).</p>
<p>Changing patterns of sun / UV light exposure for social reasons
    (holidays abroad, insufficient UV protection of exposed skin,
    sunbeds in tanning studios) have led to the increasing incidence
    of skin cancers in the United Kingdom.</p>
<h1 id="basal-cell-carcinoma-bcc">Basal cell carcinoma, BCC</h1>
<p>BCC is the most common cancer in Europe. It is usually caused
    by sun exposure, including occasional (minor) sunburns. It
    arises in the deepest layers of the outermost layer of skin;
    these deep layers are lined by basal cells. BCC are usually
    slowly growing abnormal lesions that rarely spread (<a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">metastasise</a>)
    to other parts of the body. Nevertheless, if not treated
    promptly, there is a risk of spread and disfigurement.</p>
<h1 id="squamous-cell-carcinoma-scc">Squamous cell carcinoma, SCC</h1>
<p>SCC is the second most common form of skin cancer. The abnormal
    growth arises in the upper layers of the skin (the epidermis)
    in the squamous cells that mostly make up this layer of skin.</p>
<p>Similar to BCC (see above), SCC is usually caused by exposure
    to UV light (but there are a number of other potential causes
    as well). Accordingly, common locations in the head and neck
    region are the rim of the ear, the lower lip, a bald scalp,
    or regularly sun-exposed parts of the neck. SCC occurs in
    all parts of the body (for example, the majority of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/cancer/mouth-cancer">oral (mouth) cancers</a>    are SCC).</p>
<p>Different from BCC which very rarely spread to other parts of
    the body, there is a tendency of SCC to spread <i>via</i>    local lymph nodes. This potential for metastatic spread depends
    on the site of the original tumour, its size and thickness,
    levels of invasion, rate of growth, amongst some further
    considerations.</p>
<h1 id="malignant-melanoma">Malignant melanoma</h1>
<p>Malignant melanoma is a more serious skin cancer with a tendency
    to form <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">metastases</a>.
    It arises from pigment-producing cells (melanocytes) in the
    deep (basal) layers of the skin; it often looks like a mole
    or may originate from a mole. Its incidence in the United
    Kingdom is doubling each decade, it affects a younger age
    range and carries a mortality of around 40 % (currently each
    year about 13.500 cases are diagnosed in the UK, and about
    2.000 deaths occur; malignant melanoma is not the most common
    skin cancer but it causes the most deaths). Malignant melanoma
    is more common elsewhere on the body (in men, the back; in
    women, the leg) but it does appear on the face.</p>
<p>If diagnosed (and treated) early, it is almost always curable.
    If left late or untreated, malignant melanoma may spread
    to other parts of the body and become incurable.</p>
