---
id: 5846b0e0506cd85372ce3d2b
uri: diagnosis/a-z/postoperative-problems/tongue
title: Tongue
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-03-27T08:25:34Z
created_at: 2016-12-06T12:36:48Z
---

<p>Postoperative problems affecting the tongue include</p>
<ul>
    <li>Scarring, leading to limitation of movement. This is really
        only a problem if the under-surface is involved as this
        area needs to stretch in function. Scar tissue on the
        top (dorsum) of the tongue and lateral (side) surface
        may create slight deviations in movement or minor
        <a href="/help/oral-food/ttt">taste disturbances</a> but are essentially not noticed.</li>
    <li><a href="/help/salt">Disturbed speech</a>. Movement of the
        tongue is essential for intelligible speech and articulation
        of sound is created by tongue movement and contact with
        teeth. People can show incredible degrees of adaptability
        after tongue surgery but some disturbance is inevitable.</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/dysphagia">Disturbed swallowing</a>.
        For much the same reasons as speech is disturbed. The
        tongue and lips are essential to move food bolus and
        fluid around the mouth and into the <a href="/help/oral-food/swallowing-anatomy-physiology">second (involuntary) stage of swallowing</a>.
        Movement caused by absence of tongue tissue, scarring
        and tightness or overly bulky reconstruction can cause
        this.</li>
    <li>Diminished <a href="/help/oral-hygiene">oral hygiene</a>.
        The tongue is part of the mouth self-cleaning system.</li>
    <li><a href="/help/oral-food/ttt">Alteration in taste</a>. The
        special sense taste fibres of the glossopharyngeal nerve
        (posterior (back) third of the tongue) and facial nerve
        (chorda tympani nerve, running with the lingual nerve)
        may be interfered with during tongue surgery and alter
        the sense of taste. The sensory nerve (anterior (front)
        two thirds lingual, posterior third glossopharyngeal)
        may be interfered with and create the experience of
        <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies">altered sensation</a> other than taste disturbance.</li>
</ul>
<aside>
    <p>Read about possible remedies for these problems in our section
        about <a href="/treatment/surgery/postoperative-problems">treatment of postoperative problems</a>.</p>
</aside>
