---
id: 58515c8ee0ff29ae3c6bdf22
uri: treatment/surgery/reconstruction
title: Reconstruction
type: directory
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-08-18T15:32:51Z
created_at: 2016-12-14T14:51:58Z
---

<p>The maxillofacial region is exceptionally densely packed with
    vitally important physical and social functions, senses,
    complex normal anatomy. Major resections of tumours, or defects
    from major <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/damage">trauma</a>    or <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/craniofacial-anomalies">congenital defects</a>    often involve destruction of normal anatomy and carry significant
    functional impairments as a consequence of disease and/or
    treatment.</p>
<p>Historically, patients were left disease-free but mutilated and
    severely impaired functionally. Such dysfunction and deformity
    can have a major impact on a person’s quality of life. The
    disfigurement is often easily seen and associated with
    <a href="/help/mental-health">mental health issues</a>, exacerbating an already difficult
        situation.</p>
<p>Surgical advances in head and neck reconstruction have resulted
    in major improvements in terms of outcomes and quality of
    life. Surgical advances have also established a progressive
    trend from unreconstructed deformities or grafted wounds
    to <a href="/treatment/surgery/cancer/facial-skin-cancer/more-info">locoregional flaps</a>,
    two-staged repairs and immediate microvascular reconstructive
    surgery.</p>
<p>Our section on reconstructive maxillofacial surgery explains
    and discusses the many different reconstructive techniques,
    the different classes of defects, and the reconstructive
    options for different defects.</p>
