---
id: 58515b49e0ff29ae3c6bdf0c
uri: treatment/surgery/cancer/mouth-cancer
title: Mouth cancer
type: level1
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-11-24T14:05:02Z
created_at: 2016-12-14T14:46:33Z
---

<p>Standard curative treatment modalities for mouth cancer, oral
    squamous cell carcinoma, are:</p>
<ul>
    <li>Surgery</li>
    <li><a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">Radiotherapy</a></li>
    <li>Combined modalities</li>
</ul>
<p><a href="/treatment/chemotherapy">Chemotherapy</a> is generally
    accepted to not be curative for oral squamous cell carcinoma.
    It is mainly used as a palliative tool or in combination
    with radiotherapy to enhance its effectiveness (known as
    chemoradiotherapy). It can sometimes be used as a test of
    tumour responsiveness: if the tumour regresses after a cycle
    or two of chemotherapy radical radiotherapy is added (induction
    chemotherapy).</p>
<p>Surgical tools are principally cutting implements, scalpel, cutting
    diathermy, laser or coblater. These are simply different
    ways of cutting tissue, they are not an anticancer tool although
    some surprising properties have been ascribed to <a href="/treatment/surgery/further-reading">lasers of different types</a>.
    Some surgical procedures for the treatment of mouth cancer
    may require the temporary surgical opening of the windpipe
    (trachea) for direct access, a tracheostomy; this may be
    necessary <a href="/treatment/surgery/anaesthesia/getting-started">during the surgical procedure</a>    (for simple reasons of space and accessibility) and/or afterwards
    to protect the airway where major <a href="/treatment/surgery/cancer/mouth-cancer/detailed">post-operative swelling</a>    is anticipated.</p>
<p>It is important to respect the key principle of adequate excision
    margins whichever tool is used. For oral cancer this macroscopic
    margin is 1-1.5 cm. The aim of surgery is to have a histopathological
    clearance of 5mm. This would appear straightforward if such
    a large macroscopic clearance is being taken but mucosal
    shrinkage often narrows these margins. There is some evidence
    to suggest that a clear margin of 2 mm after shrinkage produces
    the same statistically significant survival as a 5mm margin.
    A positive margin equates to a poor prognosis.</p>
<p><a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">Radiotherapy</a> uses high-energy
    radiation in order to destroy malignant growth tissue. The
    mainstay of treatment and that of proven effectiveness for
    most head and neck cancers is irradiation with high-energy
    photons, if possible by using selectively targeted imaging
    modulated radiation treatment (IMRT) schemes with the intent
    to spare healthy tissue as much as possible. The dose required
    to cure head and neck cancer is sometimes augmented by chemotherapy.
    This dose is extremely close to the point where necrosis
    of tissue occurs and both <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis">soft and hard tissue necrosis</a>    is a complication of radiation treatment in the head and
    neck region.</p>
<p><a href="/treatment/other">Non-standard treatments</a> are treatments
    which have been demonstrated to be effective anti-cancer
    strategies but are not universally available or applicable.
    They should not be confused with ‘alternative therapy’ which
    are treatments which may or may not be useful adjuncts to
    overall patient management but have no anti-cancer effect
    (such as aromatherapy, homeopathy).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/cancer/mouth-cancer">timelines of treatment and outcomes for mouth cancer</a>.</p>
</aside>
