---
id: 58515af7e0ff29ae3c6bdf07
uri: treatment/surgery/bone-lesion
title: Bone lesion
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald and David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-05-21T16:31:59Z
created_at: 2016-12-14T14:45:11Z
---

<aside>
    <p>The <a href="/treatment/surgery/fracture">treatment of fractures (broken bones)</a>        is discussed separately.</p>
</aside>
<p>Our <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/bone-lesion">diagnostic view of bone lesions</a>    identified three main themes:</p>
<ul>
    <li>inflammatory (including <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">bone infections</a>)
        and other non-neoplastic lesions;</li>
    <li>benign neoplastic lesions (benign lumps);</li>
    <li>malignant neoplastic lesions (bone cancers).</li>
</ul>
<p>A similar subdivision can be made in terms of treatment of bone
    lesions.</p>
<p>For <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection"><strong>infections</strong></a><strong>,</strong>    <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation"><strong>inflammatory</strong></a>    <strong>and other non-neoplastic bone lesions</strong>, surgical
    interventions are typically only one of several treatment
    modalities. For some of these conditions, <a href="/treatment/other/medication">medication</a>    options are the first, or only, line of treatment.</p>
<p>For a range of <strong>benign neoplastic lesions</strong>, surgical
    removal (resection) is the first line treatment. The extent
    of surgery may vary greatly and in some circumstances will
    necessitate surgical <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">reconstruction</a>    to repair the defect(s) created.</p>
<p>For <strong>malignant neoplastic bone lesions</strong>, the overall
    treatment scheme and type/extent of treatment options depends
    to some extent on the cancer being a (rare) primary malignancy,
    or <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">metastasis</a>    from some other primary malignancy (such as breast or prostate
    cancer). Where surgery is the first line option, it will
    be radical resection of the lesion wherever possible. This
    may lead to substantial defects in need of <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">reconstructive surgery</a>    for repair.</p>
<p>Localised <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>    to metastatic deposits in bone (particularly the spine) can
    provide good palliation of symptoms but not cure.</p>
<p><a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/bisphosphonates">Bisphosphonates</a>    and similar drugs have a role in the management of metastatic
    disease in the spine and long bones, but have not been properly
    assessed for application in the jaws. Also medication-related
    <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard/more-info">osteonecrosis</a>    of the jaws (MRONJ) needs to be kept in mind.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/bone-lesion">timelines and outcomes for bone lesions</a>.</p>
</aside>
