---
id: 58515b91e0ff29ae3c6bdf12
uri: treatment/surgery/damage
title: Damage
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald; Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-10-27T15:47:53Z
created_at: 2016-12-14T14:47:45Z
---

<p>Damage to soft tissues of the mouth, jaws, face, scalp and neck,
    after careful <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/damage/getting-started">assessment</a>,
    needs repair. Depending on the extent of the damage, very
    little other than cleansing of the wound(s) and some suitable
    dressing may be required.</p>
<p>At the other end of the scale, damage to soft tissues may be
    part of a life threatening emergency situation and require
    immediate major surgical interventions, including <a href="/treatment/surgery/fracture">repair of broken bones</a>    where soft tissue damage occurs in combination with underlying
    bone fractures.</p>
<p>In an emergency situation, it is international best practice
    to follow standardised principles of trauma care (Advanced
    Trauma Life Support, ATLS). This system follows a logical
    sequence of care which is designed to maximise the efficiency
    of assessment of a trauma victim, as well as provide priority
    ranking of potential, life threatening problems and simultaneous
    resuscitative interventions.</p>
<aside>
    <p>If you’d like to read about the <a href="/treatment/surgery/fracture/more-info">ATLS system</a>,
        we describe it in our section about the treatment of
        fractures.</p>
</aside>
<p>Fortunately, most soft tissue injuries are not associated with
    life threatening circumstances and there will be no need
    to escalate the treatment actions to a fully blown ATLS response,
    but instead all necessary information will have been discussed
    and the course of actions for repair agreed.</p>
<p>Soft tissue wounds, after exploration, typically require one
    or some actions and considerations from the following list:</p>
<ul>
    <li>treating haemorrhage (stopping bleeding)</li>
    <li>checking other structures (eyes, ears, salivary glands, bones)</li>
    <li>searching/checking for foreign bodies</li>
    <li>cleansing of the wound(s)</li>
    <li>closure of the wound(s) (strongly dependent on type, location
        and extent of damage)</li>
    <li>wound infections</li>
    <li>scarring.</li>
</ul>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/damage">timelines of treatment and outcomes for soft tissue damage</a>.</p>
</aside>
