---
id: 58515ab2e0ff29ae3c6bdf03
uri: treatment/surgery/abscess
title: Abscess
type: level1
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-08-23T12:06:10Z
created_at: 2016-12-14T14:44:02Z
---

<p>Minor collections (true “dental abscess”, sometimes known in
    lay terms as a “gum boil”) are manageable by simple incision
    and drainage under topical or conventional local <a href="/treatment/surgery/anaesthesia">anaesthesia</a>.
    The source of the infection should be eliminated by extraction
    or, if the tooth is felt to be salvageable, root canal or
    periodontal therapy (possible in minor infections). Any pus
    present must be drained and <a href="/diagnosis/tests/microbiology">samples cultured</a>.
    All the involved tissue spaces should be explored. <a href="/treatment/other/medication/infection">Antibiotics</a>    are an adjunct to drainage and should not be used in isolation.</p>
<p>The above scenario has nothing in common with the potentially
    lethal severe cervicofacial (affecting the neck and face)
    infections seen in the hospital environment. There early
    assessment and control of the airway is essential, involving
    anaesthesia. Securing the airway early (often combined with
    adequate drainage after awake flexible fibre optic intubation)
    is mandatory. Monitoring the airway and hydration of the
    patient are very important.</p>
<p>The risk here is that a combination of abscess formation and
    spreading cellulitis develops with airway compromise created
    both by direct pressure from the collection of pus in the
    abscess and the fluid swelling permeating throughout the
    surrounding soft tissues.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/abscess">timelines of treatment and outcomes for abscess</a>.</p>
</aside>
