---
id: 58515b2ce0ff29ae3c6bdf0b
uri: treatment/surgery/broken-tooth
title: Broken tooth
type: level1
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell & Angelika Sebald
order: 0
further_reading_uri: treatment/surgery/further-reading
updated_at: 2018-08-18T15:46:22Z
created_at: 2016-12-14T14:46:04Z
---

<p>Repair and treatment of broken and avulsed (displaced from the
    socket) permanent teeth firmly belongs in the domain of dentistry,
    not oral and maxillofacial surgery, so will not be discussed
    in detail on our website.</p>
<p>Generally speaking, minor cracks and chips may need no more than
    some polishing to re-smooth the surface; possibly some form
    of restoration using acid etch composite techniques (a common
    dental repair technique). More extensive breaks and cracks
    (that involve essentially the whole tooth) will almost always
    require root canal treatment, followed by restoring the tooth
    with a post and core crown if the tooth root can be salvaged.
    Fractures of the tooth that extend through the root are usually
    not salvageable and an immediate or delayed dental implant
    is the ideal treatment. If this is not available (usually
    a cost issue) a temporary, removable or fixed prosthesis
    can be used.</p>
<p>Please be aware that most of these types of solutions are not
    available at Emergency Departments even if a maxillofacial
    service exists.</p>
<p>Traumatically avulsed (displaced from the socket, knocked out)
    teeth should be gently cleaned and re-inserted as soon as
    possible (success drops dramatically after 90 minutes out
    of the mouth). Storing the tooth in milk or even the patient’s
    own mouth may improve the chance of successful re-implantation.</p>
<p>Re-implanted teeth and traumatically loosened teeth should be
    splinted for around 10 days. This form of treatment, where
    specific dental resources are less necessary, may be available
    in a local Emergency Department and as part of the minor
    injury service provided by on call trainee oral &amp; maxillofacial
    surgeons if that is part of that hospital’s resident service.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/broken-tooth">timelines of treatment and outcomes for broken tooth</a>.</p>
</aside>
