---
id: 58515c65e0ff29ae3c6bdf1f
uri: treatment/surgery/necrosis/hard-tissue
title: Hard tissue necrosis
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald and David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-07-14T09:36:37Z
created_at: 2016-12-14T14:51:17Z
---

<p>Bone necrosis (osteonecrosis) in the head &amp; neck region often
    occurs in combination with <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/soft">necrosis of adjacent soft tissues</a>    such as the skin or the lining of the mouth (mucosa).</p>
<aside>
    <p>If you’d like to read more about this aspect of necrosis,
        this information is on our pages about <a href="/treatment/surgery/necrosis/soft-tissue">treatment of soft tissue necrosis</a>.</p>
</aside>
<p>The treatment options for hard tissue necrosis include:</p>
<ul>
    <li>Conservative treatment of small lesions, relying on meticulous
        <a href="/help/oral-hygiene">oral hygiene</a>, aseptic
        mouthwashes (including <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/chlorhexidine">chlorhexidine</a>        as the active ingredient), and elimination of all potential
        irritants, such as ill-fitting dentures. A course of
        systemic <a href="/treatment/other/medication/infection/detailed">antibacterial medication</a>        may be part of the treatment plan. Most small such lesions
        heal over a period of 6 to 12 months with this kind of
        management regime.</li>
    <li>Slightly more extensive necrotic bone lesions with more significant
        exposure of necrotic bone require local débridement (removal
        of the necrotic bone piece(s) (called a sequestrum))
        and application of a pack to the defect to support healing.
        Suitable such packs may be fleece soaked with an <a href="/treatment/other/medication/infection/detailed">antibacterial agent</a>        or simple gauze soaked in an antiseptic agent (usually
        iodine based) such as bismuth iodoform paraffin paste
        (BIPP), iodine solution or variations thereof.</li>
    <li>Complicated (and controversial) medication schemes (PENTOCLO;
        consisting of a cocktail of <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/pentoxifylline">pentoxifylline</a>        (a drug to improve tissue oxygen supply by improved blood
        flow), <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/tocopherol">tocopherol</a>        (a vitamin E derivative with antioxidative properties)
        and clodronate (a <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/bisphosphonates">bisphosphonate</a>,
        an <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/antiresorptive">antiresorptive agent</a>        to reduce bone resorption – which itself is known to
        increase the risk of bone necrosis)) have been suggested
        for the conservative treatment of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard/more-info">osteoradionecrosis, ORN</a>.</li>
    <li>More extensive surgical débridement with water tight (and
        thus saliva tight) seal may be necessary. If suitable
        (vascularised) local soft tissue is available, a <a href="/treatment/surgery/cancer/facial-skin-cancer/more-info">local flap</a>        may provide such a seal. If no suitable local soft tissue
        can be used, depending on the individual case, a <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">regional or a free soft tissue flap</a>        may be suitable.</li>
    <li>For the treatment of persistent and extensive osteonecrosis
        of the jaws, mostly the mandible, the strategies may
        have to be escalated to major surgical resection of all
        necrotic bone sections and appropriate reconstruction
        with <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">free bone flaps</a>.</li>
</ul>
<p>The <a href="/treatment/surgery/necrosis/hard/more-info">most appropriate treatment scheme(s)</a>    for osteonecrosis are not only dictated by the extent and
    location of the lesion(s) as the above list of escalating
    treatment options may suggest. The underlying cause is another
    important factor for choosing the best possible treatment
    scheme, alongside <a href="/treatment/surgery/necrosis/hard-tissue/detailed">considerations of general fitness for major surgery and, in some circumstances, life expectancy</a>.</p>
<p>At the time of writing (2018), the most <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard">common causes of bone necrosis</a>    in the maxillofacial region are <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>    applied to the head &amp; neck region (osteoradionecrosis,
    ORN), and various medication-treatment schemes with <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/antiresorptive">antiresorptive agents</a>    for the management of various bone conditions such as osteoporosis,
    <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">bone metastases</a>,
    or <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/bone-lesion">primary bone malignancies</a>    (medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws, MRONJ). With
    these two risk factors well documented and severe osteonecrosis
    being a debilitating condition, any (improved) prevention
    is the preferred option whenever possible.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/necrosis/hard-tissue">timelines of treatment and outcomes for hard tissue necrosis</a>.</p>
</aside>
