---
id: 58a5cb07f2407fdc085428c4
uri: treatment/surgery/infection
title: Infection
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald and David. A Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-08-18T16:31:27Z
created_at: 2017-02-16T15:53:43Z
---

<p>The main treatment modalities for the many different, common
    and less common, oral and maxillofacial infections are</p>
<ul>
    <li>antimicrobial (antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral) drugs;</li>
    <li>surgical interventions;</li>
    <li>a combination of both.</li>
</ul>
<p>Antimicrobial medications play a major role in the treatment
    of infections, not just oral and maxillofacial infections.
    In many circumstances, these drugs in various <a href="/treatment/other/medication/delivery">forms of application</a>    will be the sole treatment necessary.</p>
<aside>
    <p>There is much more information on infectious microorganisms
        and the working of antibiotic drugs in our section on
        <a href="/treatment/other/medication/infection">medications to treat infections</a>.</p>
</aside>
<p>Surgical interventions in the treatment of infections have a
    main focus on the removal of the cause of the infection and
    of diseased and <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/soft">necrotic (dead) tissue</a>.
    The commonest form of this is draining pus. In some instances
    of severe acute infections, this may take the form of emergency
    surgery.</p>
<p>With <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">oral and maxillofacial infections</a>    covering the whole range from trivial to life-threatening
    problems, the scale and types of treatment options cover
    a similar range – from no need for intervention all the way
    to major emergency surgery. The exact optimal treatment routes
    depend on the type and severity of the infectious condition,
    in addition to the presence or absence of other / additional
    / underlying conditions as well any long-term treatment of
    such conditions (for example, long-term treatment with
    <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/anticoagulant">anticoagulant medications</a>).</p>
<p>There are differences in treatment approaches for soft and hard
    (bone) tissue infections, as well as in the treatment and
    management of acute and chronic infections.</p>
<p>The <a href="/treatment/surgery/infection/more-info">following page</a>    takes a closer look at specific <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection/more-info">infectious conditions</a>    and their treatment. In some cases, we point to separate
    pages, dedicated to particular conditions (for example, there
    are dedicated pages about diagnosis and <a href="/treatment/surgery/abscess">treatment of abscesses</a>,
    <a href="/treatment/surgery/bone-lesion">bone infections</a>,
    <a href="/treatment/surgery/salivary-gland-problems/getting-started">infections of the salivary glands</a>).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/infection">timelines of treatment and outcomes for infection</a>.</p>
</aside>
