---
id: 58a5da3cf2407fdc0854299e
uri: diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies/getting-started
title: Neuropathies
type: level1
description: Nerve damage
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald and David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-05-21T11:26:09Z
created_at: 2017-02-16T16:58:36Z
---

<p>Neuropathies include a range of diseases and damage to nerves,
    leading to various nerve malfunctions and dysfunction. Neuropathies
    can be acute or chronic conditions. These can affect the
    central nervous system (for example, after a stroke) or the
    peripheral nervous system (all nerves other than the brain
    and spinal cord) in regions all over the body, including
    the head and neck. Peripheral nerves tend to be either sensory
    or motor-control nerves, although special sense (such as
    taste) and mixed function nerves exist.</p>
<p>Accordingly, neuropathies lead to a wide variety of signs and
    symptoms. Where motor-control nerves are affected, motion
    will be affected (for example, eye lid or lips, or swallowing).
    Where sensory nerves are affected, this will result in abnormalities
    of sensation (dysaesthesia). Dysaesthesia can range from
    relatively unusual complete absence of sensation all the
    way to hyperaesthesia, where otherwise normal stimulus produces
    extreme sensitivity.</p>
<p>We discuss these diverse conditions, signs and symptoms under
    one heading because</p>
<ul>
    <li>there are many common causes across the range</li>
    <li><a href="/treatment/surgery/neuropathies">management and treatment of neuropathies</a>        are very similar across the range</li>
    <li>there are close anatomical relationships between the most
        commonly affected different types of peripheral nerves
        in the head and neck region.</li>
</ul>
<aside>
    <p>If you’d like to know more about the anatomy of nerves in
        the head and neck region, this information is in our
        section about <a href="/diagnosis/anatomy">head and neck anatomy</a>.</p>
</aside>
