---
id: 58af0529f2407fdc08542aa2
uri: treatment/timelines/fracture
title: Broken bone
type: page
description: Fracture
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-08-23T12:08:20Z
created_at: 2017-02-23T15:52:09Z
contents:
  - text: "Mandibular fractures"
    id: mandibular-fractures
  - text: "Zygomatic complex (cheekbone) fractures"
    id: zygomatic-complex-cheekbone-fractures
  - text: "Nasal fractures"
    id: nasal-fractures
  - text: "Midface fractures"
    id: midface-fractures
  - text: "Frontal bone &amp; frontal sinus fractures"
    id: frontal-bone-and-frontal-sinus-fractures
---

<p>It is obvious that a broken bone needs time to heal. How long
    depends on the techniques used to fix it, the state it was
    in when broken, the person the bone belongs to and what that
    person does to help it heal.</p>
<h1 id="mandibular-fractures">Mandibular fractures</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> in most cases a fractured
    mandible should be operated (reduced and fixed) within 24
    hours. This is partly because it is a ‘compound’ fracture,
    being exposed to the contaminants of the mouth, and partly
    out of humanity. The breaks affecting the tooth bearing areas
    of the jaws are usually put together (reduced) and held in
    place (fixed) by titanium (or rarely by resorbable plastic)
    plates and screws buried beneath the gum. There may be wires,
    buttons or metal bars fixed to the teeth to ensure the bite
    of the teeth is returned exactly to the pre-injury position.
    These devices may remain after the fixation to help support
    the repair and ensure the teeth remain biting correctly,
    or be removed if the surgeon is confident everything is in
    the right place.</p>
<p>Breaks away from the tooth bearing area, especially the condylar
    neck of the mandible may be managed only by elastic bands
    guiding the teeth together, or this may be used for a week
    to see if the area around the jaw joint and the fracture
    adapt as the teeth come together. If not then an open operation
    to reduce and fix the condylar fracture may be needed.</p>
<p>Accepting this, short term after injury you can expect to be
    admitted for a day and night and leave with the fracture
    put back together. It will be uncomfortable and mouth opening
    and jaw movement will be limited for the first week to 10
    days, even if the teeth are not held tightly together by
    wires or elastic bands (this is unusual nowadays).</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> by 3 weeks after the
    repair, especially if internal fixation with plates and screws
    has been used, you should feel almost back to normal and
    be eating food of increasing consistency. Bruising and swelling
    should be largely resolved but don’t expect to eat apples,
    toffee or tough meats.</p>
<p>A soft diet is required for 2 to 4 weeks to ensure the plates
    are not overstressed during the healing period. The fracture
    is sufficiently healed after this period to allow normal
    mandibular function. The plates, now obsolete, remain <i>in situ</i>    without causing problems. In the immediate postoperative
    period a strict oral hygiene regimen is implemented, in the
    form of 0.2% chlorhexidine gluconate mouth rinses, and tooth
    brushing.</p>
<p>You may be aware of a loss of feeling, especially in your lower
    lip. This may have happened at the time of the break as the
    nerve supplying feeling to the lower lip runs through the
    mandible. Alternatively it may have been damaged during the
    operation to repair the fracture.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> most people will have
    a fully healed mandible at around 3 months after treatment
    with a normal (for them) bite and normal sensation. If the
    bite has not returned to its pre-treatment state, something
    is wrong and further treatment may be needed. If altered
    sensation was noticed in the medium term it can take up to
    18 months for sensation to fully return. Usually it will,
    but if the nerve was completely divided this may never return
    to its pre-injury state.</p>
<h1 id="zygomatic-complex-cheekbone-fractures">Zygomatic complex (cheekbone) fractures</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> these fractures are very
    unlikely to be compound (connected to the skin and at greater
    risk of infection) fractures. They are connected to the air
    sinuses around the nose and nose blowing should be avoided
    as this can force air underneath the skin, creating a bizarre
    situation called subcutaneous emphysema. This increases the
    risk of infection. Generally these breaks are better treated
    in a delayed fashion to get best results when swelling has
    settled down. During this time the fractures may be uncomfortable
    but don’t tend to be painful unless they become infected.
    Double vision can be a problem and you should not drive if
    affected by double vision.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> 3 weeks after surgery
    the impressive black eye and red conjunctiva should have
    largely settled down and appearances returned to normal.
    During this time, if the fractures have been fixed with small
    plates, there is little in the way of special precautions
    to take. If no fixation has taken place it is important to
    avoid pressure on the area. Double vision should have largely
    settled down. You may notice altered sensation in the area
    below the affected eye, side of nose and even the upper front
    teeth and gums on that side. This is because the nerve supplying
    feeling to that area runs in a bony canal in the floor of
    the eye socket and emerges below the rim of the eye socket
    and can be squeezed, crushed or severed by these fractures.
    There may be a dull pain in the region of the fracture during
    winter months, slow recovery of the infraorbital nerve, fighting
    and contact sports need to be avoided for six to eight weeks
    after fracture repair.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> in the long term most
    of these fractures have healed to full strength within 3
    months and the plates can be forgotten about.</p>
<p>Persistent diplopia (double vision) requires a specialist ophthalmological
    opinion. Prescription of a prism lens, eye rehabilitation
    and potential use of corrective eye muscle surgery may be
    necessary. Again, nerve damage may take up to 18 months to
    fully resolve and if it hasn’t by that stage, it may be permanent.</p>
<h1 id="nasal-fractures">Nasal fractures</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> these fractures are usually
    treated once swelling has settled down and the bones can
    be aligned properly. A stuffy blocked nose can be expected
    until at least 10 days after treatment, although treatment
    itself is usually done as a planned day case operation.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> nasal discomfort, difficulty
    in nasal breathing and stuffiness may continue for 3 weeks
    but usually rapidly settles down over this period.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> as long as the nasal septum
    is in the correct position, airway problems should resolve
    within a couple of months. Persisting pain or difficulty
    with nasal breathing or discharge is unusual and you should
    ask your specialist about this if it persists.</p>
<h1 id="midface-fractures">Midface fractures</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> these are variable injuries.
    If combined with other facial injuries they may be treated
    simultaneously, accepting the limitations and problems caused
    by swelling. If the fractures are isolated it is perfectly
    reasonable to wait for swelling to settle, check how the
    bite relates to the pre-injury state and treat accordingly
    (if necessary – if the fragments (and there are often many)
    are not displaced, this may not be needed). If operated it
    is usual to fix 4 main ‘pillars’ of the maxilla (top jaw)
    to provide a buttress for biting forces and allow other areas
    to heal spontaneously. There can be a lot of swelling, black
    eyes, red conjunctivae and difficulty in eating during this
    phase. Once treated and the top jaw is stable, the bones
    heal quickly.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> after 3 weeks the bones
    are quite firm. If internal fixation has been used, you should
    be biting and eating reasonably normally. Again, hard foods
    and extensive chewing is not a good idea at this stage but
    gradual progression towards firmer consistencies is sensible.
    You may notice loss of sensation over the cheeks from the
    same nerve described in cheekbone fractures. Double vision
    is a sporadic problem in high level fractures involving the
    eye sockets.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> most mid-face fractures
    will have fully healed within 3 months. Unless the bite has
    not been returned to normal or there has been nerve damage
    (about which the same rules as above apply), you should be
    back to normal unless <a href="/treatment/restorative-dentistry">extensive dental work</a>    is needed. That can take much longer than the bone healing.</p>
<h1 id="frontal-bone-and-frontal-sinus-fractures">Frontal bone &amp; frontal sinus fractures</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> these are generally reduced
    and fixed after swelling has resolved, unless the brain is
    involved. In that case the surgery is combined with any neurosurgery
    needed. The approaches range from minimal and endoscopic
    approaches to raising a coronal flap which involves a hairline
    incision from ear to ear to peel back the forehead. This
    sounds dramatic but allows excellent visualisation of the
    fractures and heals within 10 days. Drains are usually used,
    especially in coronal flaps and at least one night in hospital
    is needed.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> there may be slight
    discomfort for a week or so and you will usually have to
    take decongestants for 10 days, unless the frontal sinus
    has been obliterated by bone graft. If this is done the donor
    site (usually the <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/postoperative-problems/pelvis">hip</a>)
    is a bigger problem than the head. Medium term issues with
    post-concussion syndrome (headaches, mild personality changes,
    relative photophobia, avoidance of noise) is not unusual.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> some people experience
    <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/cyst">mucous cysts</a> from residual
    lining of the frontal sinus. This is one reason some surgeons
    are in favour of removing all the mucosal lining and obliterating
    the sinus with grafted bone.</p>
