---
id: 58af057ef2407fdc08542aa9
uri: treatment/timelines/cyst
title: Cyst
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2017-08-23T12:08:20Z
created_at: 2017-02-23T15:53:34Z
contents:
  - text: "Radicular cyst"
    id: radicular-cyst
  - text: "Residual cyst"
    id: residual-cyst
  - text: "Dentigerous cyst"
    id: dentigerous-cyst
  - text: "Eruption cyst"
    id: eruption-cyst
  - text: "Nasopalatine cyst"
    id: nasopalatine-cyst
  - text: "Nasolabial cyst"
    id: nasolabial-cyst
  - text: "Keratocyst"
    id: keratocyst
  - text: "Aneurysmal bone cyst"
    id: aneurysmal-bone-cyst
  - text: "Solitary bone cyst"
    id: solitary-bone-cyst
  - text: "Oral dermoid cyst"
    id: oral-dermoid-cyst
  - text: "Angular dermoid cyst"
    id: angular-dermoid-cyst
  - text: "Mucocele"
    id: mucocele
  - text: "Ranula"
    id: ranula
  - text: "Branchial cyst"
    id: branchial-cyst
  - text: "Cystic hygroma / lymphangioma"
    id: cystic-hygroma-/-lymphangioma
  - text: "Thyroglossal duct cyst"
    id: thyroglossal-duct-cyst
---

<p>For the most part cysts of the skin and cysts of the jaws are
    treated in a similar fashion and heal along very similar
    timelines. There are a couple of exceptions which are made
    clear below. We’ve structured this in what could seem a repetitive
    fashion to help you find the healing process most suitable
    to your cyst and its treatment.</p>
<h1 id="radicular-cyst">Radicular cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> this cyst is enucleated
    (scooped out) leaving a hole in the bone. This is sore for
    about 1-2 weeks. The stitches often feel tight until they
    dissolve (very few are removed nowadays). Unless the wound
    becomes infected the discomfort gradually eases.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> the area of surgery
    may be tender but not painful for a couple of months. If
    a tooth has been root treated or apicected (root resected),
    biting on it or chewing may be uncomfortable until new bone
    forms.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> after 6 months new bone
    should have filled in the hole in the bone and both clinically
    and by X-ray things should be completely back to normal.
    Continuing pain or discharge usually mean a failure of root
    treatment or apicectomy.</p>
<h1 id="residual-cyst">Residual cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> essentially as above
    although no tooth involved.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> as above but healing
    is more rapid and the bone defect rarely gets infected as
    there is no source of irritation or infection.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> usually completely healed
    by 3 – 6 months.</p>
<h1 id="dentigerous-cyst">Dentigerous cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> the removal of the cyst
    is usually part of tooth (for example a wisdom tooth) removal.
    The symptoms are usually related to the tooth removal.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> unless the cyst has
    been marsupialised, this is the same as for removal of the
    relevant tooth.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> as above.</p>
<h1 id="eruption-cyst">Eruption cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> minor discomfort for
    a few days after de-roofing of the mucosa overlying the relevant
    tooth.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> providing the tooth
    below erupts, essentially no medium term issues.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> see medium term.</p>
<h1 id="nasopalatine-cyst">Nasopalatine cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> pain and discomfort for
    around 10 days.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> at 3 - 4 weeks an area
    of numbness behind the front teeth.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> the numbness usually resolves
    long term.</p>
<h1 id="nasolabial-cyst">Nasolabial cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> discomfort; the exact
    post-operative sequalae depend on the approach used.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> small scar if an external
    approach is used.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> as above.</p>
<h1 id="keratocyst">Keratocyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> similar to any large
    cyst; pain, discomfort and swelling. If certain additional
    treatments are used (such as cryotherapy or Carnoy solution)
    the discomfort may last longer. Possibility of numbness of
    the lower lip if a bottom jaw operation. Possibility of nose
    bleeds if the upper jaw.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> after 4 – 6 weeks all
    swelling should have settled down. These operations are often
    more extensive than for other cysts. Numbness if present
    will persist.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> these cysts do recur so
    expect to be followed up by regular (annual) X-ray, although
    this does not need to be at a hospital. If numbness was present
    it will settle after 18 months if it is going to.</p>
<h1 id="aneurysmal-bone-cyst">Aneurysmal bone cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> bruising and swelling
    can be extensive as these are very vascular lesions.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> there may be tenderness
    and bruising up to 6 – 8 weeks after surgery depending on
    how extensive it was.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> low chance of recurrence
    if removed entirely but these are rare lesions and rules
    are not hard and fast.</p>
<h1 id="solitary-bone-cyst">Solitary bone cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> quick to heal as long
    as incision line does not break down.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> very quickly heals as
    the surgery was essentially just to let the bone cavity fill
    with blood that turns into bone.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> usually no problems after
    a few months.</p>
<h1 id="oral-dermoid-cyst">Oral dermoid cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> extensive swelling especially
    under the tongue, so extra attention to normal swallowing
    is important. Wounds can breakdown so need to be kept very
    clean.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> within a month things
    are essentially back to normal.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> unless this was a very
    large dermoid approached from the neck, there will be no
    issues. If approached from the neck, a horizontal neck scar
    will be present and take 12 – 18 months to get to its best
    state in terms of appearance.</p>
<h1 id="angular-dermoid-cyst">Angular dermoid cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> approached via skin (whether
    neck or corner of the eye), so tender wound, stitches removed
    at 6 – 7 days and standard wound care.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> unless the dermoid crossed
    the skull (as is the case of some at the corner of the eye)
    usually no issues at 1 month.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> as with all external scars
    12 – 18 months for full wound healing.</p>
<h1 id="mucocele">Mucocele</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> swelling for 10 -14 days.
    Stitches may be removed or left to dissolve.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong>  rarely some loss of
    sensation in the operated area.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> biggest problem is recurrence
    as these are caused by damaged minor salivary glands and
    the surgery itself may have damaged some of them.</p>
<h1 id="ranula">Ranula</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> swelling in the floor
    of the mouth. This can be extensive – see oral dermoid (above).
    The sublingual gland should be removed for most of these
    which can cause swelling and numbness. New techniques to
    avoid this show promise but also fail.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> can recur and sometimes
    does so early. Numbness of the floor of mouth and side of
    tongue is possible as is obstruction of the submandibular
    duct which can lead to blockage of the submandibular gland.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> recurrence and long term
    numbness are possible but unusual. Removal of the submandibular
    gland is sometimes needed.</p>
<h1 id="branchial-cyst">Branchial cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> neck scar and stitches.
    Drain overnight. Stitches out in 6-10 days (surgeons vary
    a lot on this). Possible numbness of ear. Swelling, mild
    discomfort.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> scar, numbness of ear.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> the scar reaches its best
    appearance at 12 -18 months although very few people really
    notice it after a month or so. The numbness usually improves
    with time.</p>
<h1 id="cystic-hygroma-/-lymphangioma">Cystic hygroma / lymphangioma</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> macrocystic lymphangiomata
    are similar to branchial cyst (see above).</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> see branchial cyst.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> see branchial cyst.</p>
<h1 id="thyroglossal-duct-cyst">Thyroglossal duct cyst</h1>
<p><strong>Time-lines short term:</strong> stitches and drain immediately
    after surgery. Stitches out at 6 – 10 days.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines medium term:</strong> swallowing can be uncomfortable
    for a few weeks but usually resolved by second month. This
    is due to the necessary removal of the middle portion of
    the hyoid bone. Scar settles well and quickly.</p>
<p><strong>Time-lines long term:</strong> scar settles well. Recurrence
    a problem if the section of hyoid bone is not removed so
    be aware of that, otherwise full recovery anticipated by
    6 months.</p>
