---
id: 58af04c5f2407fdc08542a9e
uri: treatment/timelines/benign-lump
title: Benign lump
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-07-14T10:19:09Z
created_at: 2017-02-23T15:50:29Z
---

<p>By the very nature of these conditions the postoperative treatment
    behaviour will vary as the lesions may be very simple conditions
    requiring minor surgery which could be expected to heal very
    quickly, or could be more substantial conditions. The rate
    of recovery will also depend on somebody’s condition before
    the operation and any complicating factors (such as a coincidental
    upper respiratory tract <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">infection</a>    or a reaction to the <a href="/treatment/surgery/anaesthesia">anaesthetic</a>).</p>
<p>Benign lumps of the soft tissue of the mouth, often removed under
    <a href="/treatment/surgery/anaesthesia">local anaesthesia</a>    will usually be uncomfortable but not painful a day or two
    after treatment. The stitches used will almost always dissolve
    themselves but actually can take several weeks to resorb.
    This can be tight and irritating, and the stitches may unknot
    themselves before they dissolve. This is because the <a href="/help/oral-hygiene/saliva-and-teeth-mucosa">saliva</a>    is a buffer (keeping acidity and basicity in balance) and
    the <a href="/treatment/surgery/damage/detailed">stitches</a>    are designed to dissolve in an acidic environment.</p>
<p>Benign lumps of the jaw removed through the mouth will heal in
    a similar time but often cause considerably more swelling
    and discomfort. <a href="/treatment/other/medication/pain/detailed">Painkillers</a>    may be needed for 5 to 7 days.</p>
<p>Benign lumps of the neck constitute a more major operation but
    are usually relatively painless postoperatively. A drain
    will often be used, requiring an overnight stay in hospital.
    The drain is removed the next day usually. Stitches are removed
    no later than 7 days to avoid cross hatching scars, although
    running subcuticular (under the skin) sutures can be used
    to minimise this. Staples are similar to sutures and are
    removed be a special device quite easily. Generally, at least
    a week off work, longer if work involves heavy manual labour,
    is recommended. Normal movement and mobilisation should start
    about two days after surgery. Full recovery at two weeks
    is usual. The <a href="/treatment/surgery/damage/more-info">scar</a>    will settle to its best appearance at around 18 months postoperatively.
     </p>
