---
id: 58af055bf2407fdc08542aa6
uri: treatment/timelines/cancer/salivary-gland-cancer
title: Salivary gland cancer
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-07-13T11:36:41Z
created_at: 2017-02-23T15:52:59Z
---

<p><a href="/treatment/surgery/cancer/salivary-gland-cancer">Salivary gland cancer treatment</a>    with curative intent is primarily surgical. For malignancies
    of the minor salivary glands of the check, palate and floor
    of mouth, and the sublingual gland the timelines are identical
    to that of <a href="/treatment/timelines/cancer/mouth-cancer">mouth cancer</a>.</p>
<p>Excision of the submandibular or parotid gland for malignant
    disease is often a combination of <a href="/treatment/surgery/cancer/mouth-cancer/more-info">conventional neck dissection</a>    plus parotidectomy, with the submandibular gland being excised
    as part of level 1 in all neck dissections involving cancer
    of the mouth.</p>
<p>In this case, the timelines are similar to that of mouth cancer,
    but with additional impact of the mastoid facial incision
    scar for <a href="/treatment/surgery/salivary-gland-problems/detailed">parotidectomy</a>    , and most importantly the impact on the <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies/detailed">facial nerve</a>.
    If the facial nerve is not involved in the cancer and not
    damaged during surgery, then the medium to long term impact
    of gustatory sweating (excessive sweating in regions of the
    face) may be the only additional concern.</p>
<p>If in the removal of a parotid gland the facial nerve (which
    is embedded in the parotid gland) has to be sacrificed, then
    some form of functional rehabilitation is necessary. This
    may be <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">surgical simultaneously</a>,
    as a second procedure, by <a href="/help/physiotherapy">physiotherapy</a>    or a combination thereof.</p>
<p>When treatment is staged it is reasonable to expect only limited
    return to previous function and over the medium (months)
    to long term (years) the emphasis needs to be on adjusting
    to a ‘new normal’.</p>
<p>Where treatment is <a href="/treatment/timelines/palliative-care">palliative</a>    in nature, a relatively immediate but limited ‘new normal’
    is the expectation.</p>
<aside>
    <p>If you’d like to read more about the anatomy of the salivary
        glands and cranial nerves, this information is in our
        section about <a href="/diagnosis/anatomy">head and neck anatomy</a>.</p>
</aside>
<p><a href="/treatment/chemotherapy">Chemotherapy</a> currently
    is of no benefit in the treatment of salivary gland malignancies
    and it is highly unlikely that this type of intervention
    will affect the timeline for any of the options.</p>
<p>Long-term monitoring and reviewing in an out-patient setting
    are highly desirable for all malignancies of the salivary
    glands, spaced out-patient review visits for up to 5 years
    after treatment.</p>
