---
id: 58af0550f2407fdc08542aa5
uri: treatment/timelines/cancer/facial-skin-cancer
title: Facial skin cancer
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-07-14T10:20:04Z
created_at: 2017-02-23T15:52:48Z
---

<p>Timelines for the various types of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/cancer/facial-skin">malignant skin lesion</a>    (BCC, SCC or melanoma), vary according to the pathology,
    site, spread, reconstruction and need for <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>.</p>
<aside>
    <p>More specific information about the surgical treatment of
        the different types of facial skin cancers in the various
        facial locations can be found on our detailed page about
        <a href="/treatment/surgery/cancer/facial-skin-cancer/detailed">treatment of facial skin cancer</a>        .</p>
</aside>
<p><strong>BCC</strong>, basal cell carcinoma, can usually be cured
    by wide local excision with a clear microscopic margin of
    2 to 5 mm and the short term issues are largely influenced
    by the site and reconstruction (if any).</p>
<p>Excision and primary repair with sutures will be followed by
    swelling and discomfort, particularly a sensation of tightness
    across the suture line. Depending on the location there may
    be some difficulty in, for example, seeing clearly if surgery
    is around the eyelid. Once the sutures are removed, the main
    issues are healing of the scar which follows a fairly predictable
    sequence of events over an 18 month period to reach full
    scar maturity and best final aesthetic result.</p>
<p>Excision and skin graft is similar although a pressure dressing
    called a ‘bolster’ is sewn across the graft to hold it in
    place, usually for 10 days. This can interfere with hair
    washing and vision depending on the site of surgery for that
    period. Medium to long term healing is similar to primary
    closure, except for the donor site of the graft.</p>
<p>If a full thickness skin graft is used it will be taken from
    loose areas of skin around the face and neck where the scar
    can be hidden, the donor site heals in the same way as an
    excision and primary closure (see above).</p>
<p>A split thickness skin graft heals by secondary intention and
    involves longer. Wrap-around dressings, often on the thigh,
    are used for 3 to 4 weeks and the donor site is very often
    itchy and uncomfortable for many weeks. Although split skin
    grafts take more easily than full thickness grafts, the match
    to the face is not as good and the donor site can be very
    irritating. They are avoided for this reason unless large
    areas of coverage are needed.</p>
<p>With sun-damage related skin cancers on the face, scalp, and
    neck it is wise to use grafts in younger patients as the
    likelihood of further skin cancers with age is ever present
    and the use of local flaps early can use up available tissue
    for later in life.</p>
<p>Local flaps often offer the best tissue match for facial skin
    cancer defects and heal in the same way as primary excision
    and closure but with slightly unusual shapes of scar. Therefore,
    they follow essentially the same timelines.</p>
<p><strong>SCC</strong>, squamous cell carcinoma, treatment timeline
    follows that for BCC with some exceptions.</p>
<p>SCC, particularly of the external ear is much more likely to
    <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">metastasize</a>    It is quite rare that a facial or scalp (or particularly
    ear) SCC may require a <a href="/treatment/surgery/cancer/mouth-cancer/more-info">neck dissection</a>    to address cervical (neck) metastasis; the timeline for this
    is covered in the <a href="/treatment/timelines/cancer/mouth-cancer">timeline for the treatment of mouth cancer</a>.
    If extracapsular spread or multiple nodes are involved, or
    if the primary site demonstrates unusually aggressive or
    poor prognosis features, then external beam radiotherapy
    may be added to the treatment. This is generally less radical
    and problematic than the issues described in <a href="/treatment/timelines/cancer/mouth-cancer">timelines for mouth cancer</a>.</p>
<p>Long term issues are also present around new cancers developing
    as sun damage plays a major role in skin cancer. There is
    a higher (although still small) risk of recurrence of the
    original cancer.</p>
<p><strong>Melanoma</strong> is a more aggressive form of skin cancer
    and has a higher risk of both recurrence and <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">metastasis</a>.
    It therefore warrants a slightly different approach. Although
    similar issues to BCC and SCC apply in the short term, different
    long-term considerations over monitoring for recurrence or
    metastasis apply as, although curable, there is a higher
    incidence of recurrence and metastasis than for SCC. Uniquely
    among the skin cances specific (genomic) typing of melanoma
    is useful. This is done on the <a href="/diagnosis/tests/biopsy/detailed">histological specimen</a>.
    Typing is important in case <a href="/treatment-other-new-developments-immunotherapies-level1">immunotherapy</a>    based systemic treatment could be of value in the event of
    systemic disease (there is growing evidence that it is).</p>
