---
id: 58ef8aa12643f476580e0146
uri: diagnosis/drugs/further-reading
title: Recreational drugs
type: further
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-08-18T14:00:17Z
created_at: 2017-04-13T14:26:41Z
contents:
  - text: "Information and Support"
    id: information-and-support
  - text: "Textbooks"
    id: textbooks
  - text: "Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)"
    id: journal-articles-peer-reviewed-literature
  - text: "Electronic resources"
    id: electronic-resources
---

<h1 id="information-and-support">Information and Support</h1>
<aside>
    <p>If you want help, talk to a health professional at your maxillofacial
        and oral surgery clinic; this is the best place to start.
        After discussing any issues you may have, they will be
        able to suggest treatment or support in your local area.</p>
    <p>If you are not comfortable approaching a health professional,
        there are other options. Below you will find links to
        national support organisations.</p>
    <p><strong>Smoking:<br></strong><a href="//www.smokefree.gov/">smokefree.gov</a><br>
        <a href="//nhs.uk/smokefree">nhs.uk/smokefree</a>
    </p>
    <p><strong>Alcohol:<br></strong><a href="//www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk/">alcoholics-anonymous.org.uk</a><br>
        <a href="//www.al-anonuk.org.uk/">al-anonuk.org.uk</a>
    </p>
    <p><strong>Other recreational drugs:</strong></p>
    <p><a href="//www.talktofrank.com/get-help">talktofrank.com/get-help</a></p>
    <p><strong>Tackling addiction:</strong></p>
    <p><a href="//www.smartrecovery.org.uk/">smartrecovery.org.uk</a><br>
        <a href="//www.addaction.org.uk/help-and-support">addaction.org.uk/help-and-support</a>
    </p>
</aside>
<h1 id="textbooks">Textbooks</h1>
<p>A. Galbraith. Fundamentals of pharmacology: a text for nurses
    and health professionals. Addison Wesley Longman, Boston,
    1999.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Overview of the mode of action of many recreational drugs.</p>
</aside>
<p>R. Pates and D. Riley (eds.). Harm Reduction in Substance Use
    and High-Risk Behaviour. International Policy and Behaviour.
    Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, 2012.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Extensive good overview of wide range of substances and support
        mechanisms.</p>
</aside>
<p>D. Slish. Pharmacology of Recreational Drugs. Cognella Academic
    Publishing, 2017.</p>
<p>A. Scott and C. Gidlow (eds.). Clinical Exercise Science. Routledge,
    2016.</p>
<h1 id="journal-articles-peer-reviewed-literature">Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h1>
<p>L.B. Alexandrov, Y.S. Ju, K. Haase, P. van Loo, I. Martincorena,
    S. Nik-Zainal, Y. Totoki, A. Fujimoto, H. Nakagawa, T. Shibata,
    P.J. Campbell, P. Vineis, D.H. Phillips and M.R. Stratton.
    Mutational signatures associated with tobacco smoking in
    human cancer. <i>Science</i> <strong>354</strong>, 618-622
    (2016).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Massive genetic search for smoking-related mutations and
        DNA damage for a range of human cancers, with very clear
        evidence.</p>
</aside>
<p>K. McCarter, U. Martinez, B. Britton, A. Baker, B. Bonevski,
    G. Carter, A. Beck, C. Wratten, A. Guillaumier, S.A. Halpin
    and L. Wolfenden, Smoking cessation care among patients with
    head and neck cancer: a systematic review<i>. British Medical Journal Open</i>    2016; <strong>6</strong>:e012296. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012296.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Highlights importance of smoking cessation and mentions insufficient
        studies for best interventions.</p>
</aside>
<p>Y. Zhang, R. Wang, L. Miao, L. Zhu, H. Jiang and H. Yuan. Different
    Levels in Alcohol and Tobacco Consumption in Head and Neck
    Cancer Patients from 1957 to 2013. <i>PLoS ONE</i> <strong>10</strong>:
    e0124045. doi:10/1371/journal.pone.0124045.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Analysis of very large number of data; not definitive but
        very strong indications of strong correlations.</p>
</aside>
<p>D.H.E. Maasland, P.A. van den Brandt, B. Kremer, R.A. Goldbohm
    and L.J. Schouten. Alcohol consumption, cigarette smoking
    and the risk of subtypes of head-neck cancer: result from
    the Netherlands Cohort Study. <i>BMC Cancer</i> <strong>14</strong>,
    187 (2014).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Study confirms overall multiplicative effects of alcohol
        consumption and cigarette smoking on risk, but risks
        are different for different types of cancers.</p>
</aside>
<p>G.R. Ogden and A.J. Wight. Aetiology of oral cancer: alcohol.
    <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>    <strong>36</strong>, 247-251 (1998).</p>
<aside>
    <p>An attempt to disentangle the effects of smoking and alcohol
        consumption in the development of oral cancers.</p>
</aside>
<p>S. Bell et al. Association between clinically recorded alcohol
    consumption and initial presentation of 12 cardiovascular
    diseases: population based study using linked health records.
    <i>British Medical Journal</i> <strong>356</strong>: j909
    (2017). doi: 10.1136/bmj.j909.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Study quoting ‘heterogeneous’ associations between alcohol
        consumption and cardiovascular diseases; protective effects
        with some cardiovascular diseases from moderate drinking.</p>
</aside>
<p>N.L. Benowitz. Nicotine Addiction.<i>New England Journal of Medicine</i>    <strong>362</strong>, 2295-2303 (2010).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Molecular basis of nicotine addiction.</p>
</aside>
<p>N. Sapundzhiev and J.A. Werner. Nasal snuff: historical review
    and health related aspects.<i>Journal of Laryngology and Otology</i>    <strong>117</strong>, 686-691 (2003).</p>
<aside>
    <p>History and health effects of snuff.</p>
</aside>
<p>A. Wyss <i>et al</i>. Cigarette, Cigar, and Pipe Smoking and
    the Risk of Head and Neck Cancers: Pooled Analysis in the
    International Head and Neck Cancer Epidemiology Consortium.<i>American Journal of Epidemiology</i>    <strong>178</strong>, 679-690 (2013).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Discussing increased risk of head and neck cancers with smoking.</p>
</aside>
<p>P. Clapp, S.V. Bhave and P.L. Hoffman. How adaptation of the
    brain to alcohol leads to dependence: a pharmacological perspective.<i>Alcohol Research and Health</i>    <strong>31</strong>, 310-339 (2008).</p>
<aside>
    <p>How alcohol abuse leads to dependence.</p>
</aside>
<p>H. Tønnesen, P.R. Nielsen, J.B. Lauritzen and A.M. Møller. Smoking
    and alcohol intervention before surgery: evidence for best
    practice.<i>British Journal of  Anaesthesia</i> <strong>102</strong>,
    297-306 (2009).</p>
<aside>
    <p>About the benefits of stopping smoking and alcohol consumption
        pre-surgery.</p>
</aside>
<p>D.K. Tracey, D.M. Wood and D. Baumeister. Novel psychoactive
    substances: types, mechanisms of action, and effects. <i>British Medical Journal</i>    <strong>356</strong>: i6848 (2017). doi:10.1136/bmj.i6848.</p>
<p>D.K. Tracey, D.M. Wood and D. Baumeister. Novel psychoactive
    substances: identifying and managing acute and chronic harmful
    use. <i>British Medical Journal</i> <strong>356</strong>:
    i6814 (2017). doi:10.1136/bmj.i6814.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Up-to-date overview with useful tabulated information about
        various classes of recreational drugs; lists of resources
        and support also included.</p>
</aside>
<p>N. Hawkes. Sixty seconds on … snus. <i>British Medical Journal</i>    <strong>356</strong>: j536 (2017). doi:10.1136/bmj.j536.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Mentions Swedish snus as a less harmful way to consume nicotine.</p>
</aside>
<p>European Commission, Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly
    Identified Health Risks. Health effects of smokeless tobacco
    products. Brussels (2008).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Report highlights need for further systematic research to
        clarify health risks associated with use of smokeless
        tobacco products; unclear if there are increased risks
        for oral cancer.</p>
</aside>
<p>J. Luo, W.Ye, K. Zandehdel, J. Adami, H.O. Adami and P. Boffetta.
    Oral use of Swedish moist snuff (snus) and risk for cancer
    of the mouth, lung, and pancreas in male construction workers:
    a retrospective cohort study. <i>Lancet</i> <strong>369</strong>,
    2015-2020 (2007).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Points out increased risk for pancreatic cancer but no significantly
        enhanced risk for oral or lung cancer from use of snus.</p>
</aside>
<aside>
    <p> R.O. Greer Jr. Oral manifestations of smokeless tobacco use.
        <i>Otolaryngological Clinics of North America</i> <strong>44</strong>,
        31-56 (2011).</p>
</aside>
<aside>
    <p>Finds minimal risk for oral cancers from smokeless tobacco
        use but confirms findings of enhanced risk of pancreatic
        cancer from use of snus.</p>
</aside>
<p>A.B. Wyss, M. Hashibe, Y.-C.A. Lee et al. Smokeless Tobacco Use
    and the Risk of Head and Neck Cancer: Pooled Analysis of
    US studies in the INHANCE Consortium. <i>American Journal of Epidemiology</i>    <strong>184</strong>, 703-716 (2016).</p>
<aside>
    <p>This study points out that risk for oral cancers ‘appears
        to be associated’ with use of smokeless tobacco products,
        especially snuff. The situation is, obviously, unclear
        and there is no definitive answer.</p>
</aside>
<p>A.W. Midgley et al. Exercise program design considerations for
    head and neck cancer survivors. <i>European Archives of Otorhinolaryngology</i>    <strong>275</strong>, 169-179 (2018).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Highlights the many benefits of appropriate exercise.</p>
</aside>
<p>J.K. Silver and J. Baima. Cancer Prehabilitation: an Opportunity
    to Decrease Treatment Related Morbidity, Increase Cancer
    Treatment Options, and Improve Physical and Psychological
    Health Outcomes. <i>Amercian Journal of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation</i>    <strong>92</strong>, 715-727 (2013).</p>
<p>L.I. Wagner and D. Cella. Fatigue and cancer: causes, prevalence
    and treatment approaches. <i>British Journal of Cancer</i>    <strong>91</strong>, 822-828 (2004).</p>
<p>F. Cramp and J. Daniel. Exercise for the management of cancer-related
    fatigue in adults. <i>Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews</i>    <strong>2</strong>, CD006145 (2008). DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006145.pub2.</p>
<p>V. Ferrera et al. Maximizing patient adherence to prehabilitation:
    what do the patients say? <i>Supportive Care in Cancer</i>    <strong>26</strong>, 2717–2723 (2018).</p>
<p>T. Cedère-Maruyama and A. Moore. Anesthesia in the Elderly Patient
    Undergoing Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery. <i>Clinics in Geriatric Medicine</i>    34, 279-288 (2018).</p>
<p>A. Barbera-Garcia et al. Personalised prehabilitation on high
    risk patients undergoing elective major abdominal surgery.
    <i>Annals of Surgery</i> <strong>267</strong>, 50-56 (2018).</p>
<p>G.H. Huang et al. Structured exercise program prior to major
    cancer surgery improves cardiopulmonary fitness: a retrospective
    cohort study. <i>Supportive Care in Cancer</i> <strong>24</strong>,
    2277-2285 (2016).</p>
<p>H. Timmermann et al. Feasibility and preliminary effectiveness
    of preoperative therapeutic exercise in patients with cancer.
    A pragmatic study. <i>Physiotherapy Theory and Practice</i>    <strong>27</strong>, 117-124 (2011).</p>
<p>F. Singh et al. A systematic review of pre-surgical exercise
    intervention studies with cancer patients. <i>Surgical Oncology</i>    <strong>22</strong>, 92-104 (2013).</p>
<h1 id="electronic-resources">Electronic resources</h1>
<p><a href="https://www.talktofrank.com/">talktofrank.com</a></p>
<aside>
    <p>A comprehensive source of information about a very large
        number or recreational drugs; regularly updated. At times
        overly protective and a bit alarmist as could be expected
        from a conventional government source but altogether
        an excellent source of information.</p>
</aside>
<p><a href="https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-physical-activity-guidelines">gov.uk/government/publications/uk-physical-activity-guidelines</a></p>
<aside>
    <p>UK physical activity guidelines 2011.</p>
</aside>
<p><a href="https://www.macmillan.org.uk/_images/the-importance-physical-activity-for-people-living-with-and-beyond-cancer_tcm9-290123.pdf">macmillan.org.uk/_images/the-importance-physical-activity-for-people-living-with-and-beyond-cancer_tcm9-290123.pdf</a></p>
<aside>
    <p>Macmillan Cancer Support. Physical activity and cancer: A
        concise evidence review (2017).</p>
</aside>
