---
id: 590c4f4cb0214bbc7a57aeab
uri: treatment/surgery/tumour/blood-malignancy
title: Blood malignancy
type: level1
surtitle: Tumour
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-07-14T10:17:24Z
created_at: 2017-05-05T10:09:16Z
---

<p>Management and treatment of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/blood-malignancy">haematological malignancies</a>    are taken care of by haematological oncology. However, oral
    and maxillofacial surgery has a supporting role by dealing
    with / managing of some of the adverse effects of these oncological
    treatments, by providing diagnostic support in the form of
    <a href="/diagnosis/tests/biopsy">biopsies</a>, or by resection
    (and, where necessary, <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">reconstruction</a>)
    of deposits of these malignancies in hard or soft tissues
    in the head and neck region.</p>
<p>The term <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/blood-malignancy/more-info">haematological malignancy</a>    covers a spectrum of different conditions affecting the blood
    and/or lymphatic systems, including different forms of lymphoma,
    myeloma and different forms of acute and chronic leukaemia.
    Despite differences between these conditions, most of them
    are treated by some variation of <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy">chemo-</a>    and/or <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>    and thus have similar adverse effects that will be seen in
    maxillofacial surgery. A subgroup of leukaemia patients will
    have, or will have had, a bone marrow transplant from a genetically
    non-identical donor (allotransplant), with subsequent need
    of ongoing <a href="/treatment-other-medication-miscellaneous-immunosuppressant">immunosuppressant medication</a>.
    Another subgroup of mostly leukaemia patients (<a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/blood-malignancy">acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL)</a>    most commonly) are children. Both of these groups typically
    have special and often long-term needs for consideration
    in a maxillofacial clinic.</p>
<p>Common tasks for oral and maxillofacial surgery in supporting
    the treatment of haematological malignancies include</p>
<ul>
    <li>assessment and management of various oral conditions, although
        these are more normally carried out by paediatric dental
        specialists or restorative dentists (for example,
        <a href="/treatment/restorative-dentistry/periodontal/detailed">periodontal disease</a>, <a href="/treatment/restorative-dentistry/cancer-pretreatment">before</a>            and <a href="/treatment/restorative-dentistry/cancer-post-treatment">after</a>            cancer treatment);</li>
    <li>supporting diagnosis by different <a href="/diagnosis/tests/biopsy">biopsies</a>;</li>
    <li>some other surgical interventions;</li>
    <li>assessment and treatment of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/oral-mucosal-lesion/detailed">mucositis</a>        (severe inflammation of the mucosa);</li>
    <li>assessment and treatment of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection/more-info">oral infections</a>,
        mostly fungal and bacterial infections;</li>
    <li>various aspects, depending on the underlying condition, of
        long-term monitoring and interventions after completion
        of oncological treatment.</li>
</ul>
<p>The following page discusses these oral and maxillofacial surgery
    treatment modalities in more detail in the context of supporting
    oncological treatment of haematological conditions. Many
    of the treatment modalities are similar or identical to those
    used more widely for a range of oral and maxillofacial conditions
    and are discussed in detail in various other sections of
    the website.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Read about <a href="/treatment/timelines/tumour/blood-malignancy">timelines of treatment and outcomes for blood malignancy</a>.</p>
</aside>
