---
id: 5941af9ff20f806a274d240a
uri: help/oral-hygiene/further-reading
title: Oral hygiene
type: further
order: 0
hide: true
updated_at: 2019-12-13T14:27:02Z
created_at: 2017-06-14T21:50:23Z
---

<h2>Textbooks</h2>
<p>M.L. Darby and M.M. Walsh. Dental Hygiene. Theory and
    Practice (3<sup>rd</sup> ed.). Elsevier-Saunders, St.
    Louis, 2010.</p>
<p>A Felton, A. Chapman and S. Felton. Basic Guide to Oral
    Health Education and Promotion (2<sup>nd</sup> ed.).
    Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, 2014.</p>
<p>R. Levine and C. Stillman-Lowe. The Scientific Basis of
    Oral Health Education. BDJ Clinician’s Guide
    (8<sup>th</sup> ed.). Springer, 2018.</p>
<h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2>
<p>J.T. Newton and K. Asimakopoulou. Managing oral hygiene
    as a risk factor for periodontal disease: a systematic
    review of psychological approaches to behaviour change
    for improved plaque control in periodontal management.
    <i>Journal of Clinical Periodontology</i>
    <strong>42</strong>, S36-S46 (2015).</p>
<p>D. Richards. The effectiveness of interproximal oral
    hygiene aids. <i>Evidence-Based
        Dentistry</i> <strong>19</strong>, 107–108 (2018).
</p>
<p>B. Rapone et al. Oral Hygiene in Patients with Oral
    Cancer Undergoing Chemotherapy and/or Radiotherapy after
    Prosthesis Rehabilitation: Protocol Proposal. <i>Oral
        &amp; Implantology</i> <strong>IX</strong>, S1 90-97
    (2016).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Reinforces the obvious: optimal oral hygiene improves
        outcomes and quality of life.</p>
</aside>
<p>J.M. Schuurhuis et al. Evidence supporting pre-radiation
    elimination of oral foci of infection in head and neck
    cancer patients to prevent oral sequelae. A systematic
    review. <i>Oral Oncology</i> <strong>51</strong>,
    212-220 (2015).</p>
<p>S. Esin et al. Longitudinal study on the effect of oral
    hygiene measures on the salivary count of microbial
    species with cariogenic potential. <i>Journal of
        Biological Regulators and Homeostatic Agents</i>
    <strong>32</strong>, 1407-1420 (2018).</p>
<p>G. Schmalz et al. No difference between manual and
    different power toothbrushes with and without specific
    instructions in young, oral healthy adults—results of a
    randomized clinical trial. <i>Clinical Oral
        Investigations</i> <strong>22</strong>, 1147-1155
    (2018).</p>
<h2>Electronic resources</h2>
<p>An up-to-date and evidence-based general resource of
    information from Public Health England:<br><a href="https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/605266/Delivering_better_oral_health.pdf">https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/605266/Delivering_better_oral_health.pdf</a>
</p>
