---
id: 5941b148f20f806a274d2447
uri: treatment/surgery/further-reading
title: Surgery
type: further
order: 0
hide: true
updated_at: 2019-07-14T10:38:06Z
created_at: 2017-06-14T21:57:28Z
contents:
  - text: "General"
    id: general
  - text: "Anaesthesia"
    id: anaesthesia
  - text: "Benign lumps"
    id: benign-lumps
  - text: "Bone lesions (benign and malignant)"
    id: bone-lesions-benign-and-malignant
  - text: "Cancer – facial skin, mouth and salivary glands"
    id: cancer--facial-skin-mouth-and-salivary-glands
  - text: "Cleft lip / palate and craniofacial syndrome"
    id: cleft-lip-/-palate-and-craniofacial-syndrome
  - text: "Cysts"
    id: cysts
  - text: "Dysphagia"
    id: dysphagia
  - text: "Dysplasia / oral mucosal lesions"
    id: dysplasia-/-oral-mucosal-lesions
  - text: "Ectopic teeth"
    id: ectopic-teeth
  - text: "Facial appearance and jaw disproportion"
    id: facial-appearance-and-jaw-disproportion
  - text: "Implants (craniofacial)"
    id: implants-craniofacial
  - text: "Infection (abscess, fistula)"
    id: infection-abscess-fistula
  - text: "Jaw joint and facial pain, neuropathies"
    id: jaw-joint-and-facial-pain-neuropathies
  - text: "Necrosis (hard and soft tissues)"
    id: necrosis-hard-and-soft-tissues
  - text: "Postoperative problems"
    id: postoperative-problems
  - text: "Preprosthetic surgery"
    id: preprosthetic-surgery
  - text: "Reconstruction"
    id: reconstruction
  - text: "Salivary gland problems"
    id: salivary-gland-problems
  - text: "Trauma, hard and soft tissues / fractures and soft tissue damage"
    id: trauma-hard-and-soft-tissues-/-fractures-and-soft-tissue-damage
  - text: "Trismus"
    id: trismus
  - text: "Tumour (metastases, haematological, other)"
    id: tumour-metastases-haematological-other
  - text: "Vascular abnormalities"
    id: vascular-abnormalities
  - text: "Xerostomia"
    id: xerostomia
---

<h1>General</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>J.C. Watkinson and P.W. Gilbert (eds.). Stell &amp;     Maran’s Textbook of Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology,     5<sup>th</sup> ed., CRC Press, Philadelphia, 2012.</p> <p>D.A. Mitchell and A.N. Kanatas. An Introduction to Oral     and Maxillofacial Surgery, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., CRC     Press, Boca Raton, 2015.</p> <p>P. Brennan et al. (eds.). Maxillofacial Surgery,     3<sup>rd</sup> ed., Churchill Livingstone, London, 2016. </p> <p>D.Kademani and P. Tiwana (eds.). Atlas of Oral and     Maxillofacial Surgery, Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis,     2016.</p> <h2>Electronic resources</h2> <p>The British Association of Oral and Maxillofacial     Surgeons; <a         href="http://www.baoms.org.uk">www.baoms.org.uk</a> </p> <p>Royal College of Surgeons; <a         href="https://www.rcseng.ac.uk">https://www.rcseng.ac.uk</a> </p> <p>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery; <a         href="http://www.bjoms.com">www.bjoms.com</a></p> <p>The American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial     Surgeons; <a         href="http://www.aaoms.org">www.aaoms.org</a></p> <p>The British Association of Head and Neck Oncologists; <a         href="http://www.bahno.org.uk">www.bahno.org.uk</a> </p> <p>The British Orthodontic Society; <a         href="http://www.bos.org.uk">www.bos.org.uk</a></p> <p>The European Association of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial     Surgery; <a         href="http://www.eurofaces.com">www.eurofaces.com</a> </p> <p>The International Association of Oral and Maxillofacial     Surgeons; <a         href="http://www.iaoms.org">www.iaoms.org</a></p> <h1>Anaesthesia</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>I. Shaw, C. Kumar and C. Dodds (eds.). Oxford Textbook of     Anaesthesia for Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Oxford     University Press, Oxford, New York, 2010.</p> <p>K. Allman, I. Wilson and A. O’Donnell (eds.). Oxford     Handbook of Anaesthesia. Oxford University Press,     Oxford, New York, 2015.</p> <p>J.A. Baart and H.S. Brand (eds.). Local Anaesthesia in     Dentistry, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. Springer, 2017.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>C. McCarthy. E. Warren and D. Sleeman. Comparison of     anaesthetic regime in patients undergoing third molar     extraction. <i>Oral Surgery</i> <strong>11</strong>,     33-40 (2018).</p> <p>S.W. Evans and R.A. McCahon. Management of the airway in     maxillofacial surgery: part 1. <i>British Journal of         Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>56</strong>, 463-468 (2018).</p> <p>S.W. Evans and R.A. McCahon. Management of the airway in     maxillofacial surgery: part 2. <i>British Journal of         Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>56</strong>, 469-474 (2018).</p> <p>S.W. Evans and R.A. McCahon. Management of postoperative     pain in maxillofacial surgery. <i>British Journal of         Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>57</strong>, 4-11 (2019).</p> <p>M. Dobbeleir et al. Postoperative nausea and vomiting     after oral and maxillofacial surgery: a prospective     study. <i>International Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>47</strong>,     721-725 (2018).</p> <h2>Electronic resources</h2> <p>Difficult Airway Society Guidelines: <a         href="https://www.das.uk.com/">https://www.das.uk.com/</a> </p> <h1>Benign lumps</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>W. jr. Lawrence, J.P. Neifeld and J.J. Terz. Manual of     Soft-Tissue Tumor Surgery. Springer Science and Business     Media, 2012.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>K.A.O.M. Chapelle et al. Rational approach to diagnosis     and treatment of ameloblastomas and odontogenic     keratocysts. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>42</strong>,     381-390 (2004).</p> <p>F.N. Hendra et al. Radical vs conservative treatment of     intraosseous ameloblastoma: Systematic review and     meta-analysis. <i>Oral Diseases</i>, 1-14 (2019).</p> <aside>     <p>A clear answer to the title question: less recurrence         with radical surgery interventions.</p> </aside> <p>A.C. McClary et al. Ameloblastoma: A clinical review and     trends in management. <i>European Archives of         Otorhinolaryngology</i> <strong>273</strong>,     1649-1661 (2016).</p> <p>Y. Zeng et al. Marsupialisation for the treatment of     unicystic ameloblastoma of the mandible: a long-term     follow up of 116 cases. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>57</strong>,     655-662 (2019).</p> <p>R. Almeida et al. Recurrence rate following treatment for     primary multicystic ameloblastome: systematic review and     meta-analysis. <i>International Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>45</strong>,     359-367 (2016).</p> <h1>Bone lesions (benign and malignant)</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>E. Santini-Araujo, R.K. Kalil, F. Bertoni and Y.-K. Park     (eds.). Tumors and Tumor-Like Lesions of Bone: For     Surgical Pathologists, Orthopedic Surgeons and     Radiologists. Springer, 2015.</p> <p>D. Heymann (ed.). Bone Cancer: Primary Bone Cancers and     Bone Metastases, 2nf ed. Elsevier, San Diego, 2015.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>A. Tan and S.H. Ralston. Paget’s disease of bone.     <i>Quarterly Journal of Medicine</i>     <strong>107</strong>, 865-869 (2014).</p> <aside>     <p>A clear and concise summary with key references.</p> </aside> <p>R.K. Lalam et al. Paget Disease of Bone. <i>Seminars in         muscoskeletal radiology</i> <strong>20</strong>,     287-299 (2016).</p> <p>J.S. Lee et al. Clinical guidelines for the management of     craniofacial fibrous dysplasia. <i>Journal of Rare         Diseases</i> <strong>7</strong>     (suppl)<strong>,</strong> 1-19 (2012).</p> <p>A. Marí et al. Diffuse sclerosing ostreomyelitis (DSO) of     the mandible in SAPHO syndrome: A novel approach with     anti-TNF therapy. Systematic review. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>42</strong>, 1990-1996 (2014).</p> <p>G.J. Ridder et al. Central skull base osteomyelitis: new     insights and implications for diagnosis and treatment.     <i>European Archives of Otorhinolaryngology</i>     <strong>272</strong>, 1269-1276 (2015).</p> <p>M. Kreppel and J. Zöller. Ameloblastoma – Clinical,     radiological and therapeutic findings. <i>Oral         Diseases</i> <strong>24</strong>, 63-66 (2018).</p> <p>S. Otto et al. Denusomab as a potential treatment     alternative for patients suffering from diffuse     sclerosing osteomyelitis of the mandible. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>46</strong>, 534-537 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>A cautious suggestion, as an alternative.</p> </aside> <h1>Cancer – facial skin, mouth and salivary glands</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>M. Hayes. Practical Skin Cancer Surgery. Elsevier     Australia, 2014.</p> <aside>     <p>Does exactly what the title says– brief overview of         practical aspects, not just for facial skin cancers.     </p> </aside> <p>B. Gastman (ed.). Cutaneous Malignancies: A Surgical     Perspective. Thieme, New York, Stuttgart, 2018.</p> <aside>     <p>General overview, also discusses some non-surgical         treatment options.</p> </aside> <p>J.C. Watkinson, M.N. Gaze and J.A. Wilson. Head and neck     surgery, 4<sup>th</sup> ed., Butterworth-Heinemann,     Oxford, 2000.</p> <p>R. Fernandes. Local and Regional Flaps in Head &amp; Neck     Reconstruction. Wiley Blackwell, Oxford, 2014.</p> <p>R. Fernandes. Oral, Head and Neck Oncology and     Reconstructive Surgery. Elsevier Health Sciences Ebook,     2017.</p> <p>J. Gluckman and J. Johnson. Surgical Management of Neck     Metastases. Martin Dunnitz, London, 2003.</p> <p>J. Gavilan, J. Herranz, L. De Santo and C. Gavilan.     Functional and Selective Neck Dissection. Thieme,     Stuttgart, 2002.</p> <p>J. Shah. Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology,     3<sup>rd</sup> edition. Mosby, 2003.</p> <p>M.R. Kesting. Oral Cancer Surgery: A Visual Guide. Thieme     Verlag, Stuttgart, 2014.</p> <p>T. Kirita and K. Omura (eds.). Oral Cancer: Diagnosis and     Therapy. Springer International, 2015.</p> <p>J.P. Shah and N.W. Johnson (eds.). Oral and Oropharyngeal     Cancer, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2018. </p> <p>J.W. Werning (ed.). Oral Cancer: Diagnosis, Management     and Rehabilitation. Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart, 2007.</p> <p>M.A. Kuriakose (ed.). Contemporary Oral Oncology:     Rehabilitation and Supportive Care. Springer, 2017.</p> <aside>     <p>A clear and useful, realistic overview of the many         supportive options, including the important role of         self-help. All of these aspects are also covered on         this website in the <a             href="/help-selfhelp-preamble">section on Help             &amp; self-help</a> .</p> </aside> <p>L. Licitra and L.D. Locati. Salivary Gland Cancer: From     Diagnosis to Tailored Treatment. Springer International     Publishing, 2019.</p> <p>P.J. Bradley and D.W. Eisele (eds.). Salivary Gland     Neoplasms. Advances in Oto-Rhino-Laryngology. Karger     Medical and Scientifc Publishers, 2016.</p> <p>V.-V- Costan. Management of Extended Parotid Tumors.     Spinger International, 2016.</p> <h2>Electronic resources</h2> <p>The National Cancer Institute (United States) <a         href="http://www.cancer.gov">www.cancer.gov</a></p> <p>In the UK: <a         href="http://www.ncri.org.uk">www.ncri.org.uk</a> </p> <p>British Association of Dermatology (BAD) <a         href="http://www.bad.org.uk">www.bad.org.uk</a></p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>K.D. Olsen and J.E. Lewis. Carcinoma ex pleomorphic     adenoma: a clinicopathological review. <i>Head and         Neck</i> <strong>23</strong>, 705-712 (2001).</p> <p>D.N. Sutton et al. The prognostic implications of the     surgical margin in oral squamous cell carcinoma.     <i>International Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial         Surgery</i> <strong>32</strong>, 30-34 (2003).</p> <p>A. Ferlito et al. Changing concepts in the surgical     management of the cervical node metastasis. <i>Oral         Oncology</i> <strong>39</strong>, 429-435 (2003). </p> <p>R. Lindberg. Distribution of cervical lymph node     metastases from squamous cell carcinoma of the upper     respiratory and digestive tracts. <i>Cancer</i>     <strong>29</strong>, 1446-1449 (1972).</p> <p>C.J. Kerawala and M. Heliotis. Prevention of     complications in neck dissection. <i>Head and Neck         Oncology</i> <strong>1</strong>: 35 (2009).</p> <aside>     <p>General review.</p> </aside> <p>M.N. Elsheikh et al. Elective supraomohyoid neck     dissection for oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma: is     dissection of sublevel IIB necessary<i>? Oral         Oncology</i> <strong>44</strong>, 216-219 (2008). </p> <p>P.A. Brennan et al. The contemporary management of     chyle-leak following cervical thoracic duct damage.     <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>50</strong>, 197-201 (2012).</p> <p>A. Rinaldo, A.R. Shaha, P.K. Pellitteri, P.J. Bradley and     A. Ferlito. Management of malignant sublingual salivary     gland tumours. <i>Oral Oncology</i> <strong>40</strong>,     2-5 (2004).</p> <p>R.B. Bell et al. Management and outcome of patients with     malignant salivary gland tumors. <i>Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>63</strong>,     917-928 (2005).</p> <p>T.K. Ong, C. Murphy, A.B. Smith, A.N. Kanatas and D.A.     Mitchell. Survival after surgery for oral cancer: a     30-year experience. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>55</strong>,     911-916 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Covering 30 years at Leeds Hospitals.</p> </aside> <p>A. Kolk, K.-D. Wolff, R. Smeets et al. Melanotic and     non-melanotic malignancies of the face and external ear     – A review of current treatment concepts and future     options. <i>Cancer Treatment Reviews</i>     <strong>40</strong>, 819-837 (2014).</p> <p>F. López et al. Update on primary head and neck mucosal     melanoma. <i>Head &amp; Neck</i> <strong>38</strong>,     147-155 (2016).</p> <p>F. Bath-Hextall et al. Interventions for basal cell     carcinoma of the skin: systematic review. <i>British         Medical Journal</i> <strong>329</strong>, 705-708     (2004).</p> <p>B. Gurney and C. Newlands. Management of regional     metastatic disease in head and neck cutaneous     malignancy. 1. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma.     <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>52</strong>, 301-307 (2014).</p> <p>C. Newlands and B. Gurney. Management of regional     metastatic disease in head and neck cutaneous     malignancy. 2. Cutaneous malignant melanoma. <i>British         Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>52</strong>, 294-300 (2014).</p> <p>B.G. Main et al. The metastatic potential of head and     neck cutaneous malignant melanoma: is sentinel node     biopsy useful? <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>52</strong>,     340-343 (2014).</p> <p>R.J. Marsden et al. Revised U.K. guidelines for the     management of cutaneous melanoma. <i>British Journal of         Dermatology</i> <strong>163</strong>, 238-256     (2010).</p> <p>N.R. Telfer, G.B. Colver and C.A. Morton. Guidelines for     the management of basal cell carcinoma. <i>British         Journal of Dermatology</i> <strong>159</strong>,     35-48 (2008).</p> <p>C.S. Wong, R.C. Strange and J.T. Lear. Basal cell     carcinoma. <i>British Medical Journal</i>     <strong>327</strong>, 794-798 (2003).</p> <p>C. Berking et al. Basal Cell Carcinoma –Treatments for     the Commonest Skin Cancer. <i>Deutsches Ärzteblatt         International</i> <strong>111</strong>, 389-395     (2014).</p> <aside>     <p>Useful, concise review of the various surgical and         non-surgical treatment options.</p> </aside> <p>M.V. Heppt et al. Prognostic factors and treatment     outcomes in 444 patients with mucosal melanoma.     <i>European Journal of Cancer</i> <strong>81</strong>,     36-44 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Not only focus on oral mucosa but on all body         regions; overview and assessment of / reflection on         current state of affairs for treatments and outcomes         across 11 German university hospitals.</p> </aside> <p>D. Schadendorf et al. Melanoma. <i>The Lancet</i>     <strong>392</strong>, 971-984 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>Comprehensive current review of cutaneous melanoma;         epidemiology, pathophysiology, classification,         diagnosis and treatment options.</p> </aside> <p>A.K. D’Cruz et al. Elective versus Therapeutic Neck     Dissection in Node-Negative Oral Cancer. <i>The New         England Journal of Medicine</i>     <strong>373</strong>, 521-529 (2015).</p> <h1>Cleft lip / palate and craniofacial syndromes</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>T.T. Turvey, K.W.L. Vig and R.J. Fonseca (eds.). Facial     Clefts and Craniosynostosis: Principles and Management.     Saunders, 1996.</p> <aside>     <p>A massive multi-author tome but contains a vast array         of erudite information from all around the world.     </p> </aside> <p>R.D. Bennun, J.F. Harfin, G.K.B. Sándor and D. Genecov     (eds.). Cleft Lip and Palate Management. A Comprehensive     Atlas. Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, 2016.</p> <p>S. Berkowitz (ed.). Cleft Lip and Palate: Diagnosis and     Management. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. </p> <aside>     <p>Another multi-author tome; good chapters about         embryology and other developmental aspects.</p> </aside> <p>B. Shi and B.C. Sommerlad. Cleft Lip and Palate Primary     Repair. Springer, 2015.</p> <p>N. Nadjmi. Surgical Management of Cleft Lip and Palate: A     Comprehensive Atlas. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2018. </p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>J.V. Pattisapu et al. Craniosynosthosis: diagnosis and     surgical management. <i>Atlas of the Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery Clinics of North America</i>     <strong>18</strong>, 77-91 (2010).</p> <p>C.M. Rivera-Serrano et al. Pedicled facial buccinator     (FAB) flap: a new flap for reconstruction of skull     defects. <i>Laryngoscope</i> <strong>120</strong>,     1922-1930 (2010).</p> <p>A.C. van Lierop and J.J. Fagan. Buccinator myomucosal     flap: clinical results and review of anatomy, surgical     technique and applications. <i>The Journal of         Laryngology and Otology</i> <strong>122</strong>,     181-187 (2008).</p> <p>B. Bianchi et al. Myomucosal cheek flaps: applications in     intraoral reconstruction using three different     techniques. <i>Oral Surgery Oral Medicine Oral Pathology         Oral Radiology Endodontics</i> <strong>108</strong>,     353-359 (2009).</p> <p>T. De Jong et al<strong>.</strong> Long-term functional     outcome in 167 patients with syndromic craniosynostosis;     defining a syndrome-specific risk profile. <i>Journal of         Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgery</i>     <strong>63</strong>, 1635-1641 (2010).</p> <h2>Electronic resources</h2> <p>Cleft Lip &amp; Palate Association; <a         href="//www.clapa.com">www.clapa.com</a></p> <h1>Cysts</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>M. Shear and P.M. Speight. Cysts of the Oral and     Maxillofacial Regions, 4<sup>th</sup> ed., Oxford, John     Wiley &amp; Sons, 2008.</p> <aside>     <p>Remains one of the few textbooks on oral and jaw         cysts.</p> </aside> <p>J.V. Soames and J.C. Southam, Oral pathology,     4<sup>th</sup> ed., Oxford University Press, 2005.</p> <aside>     <p>Readable and up to date account of pathological         appearance and behaviour of jaw cysts.</p> </aside> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>K.A.O.M. Chapelle et al. Rational approach to diagnosis     and treatment of ameloblastomas and odontogenic     keratocysts. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>42</strong>,     381-390 (2004).</p> <p>P.J. Stoelinga. The treatment of odontogenic keratocysts     by excision of the overlying attached mucosa,     enucleation, and treatment of the bony defect with     Carnoy solution. <i>Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial         Surgery</i> <strong>63</strong>, 1662-1666 (2005). </p> <p>P.J. Stoelinga. The management of aggressive cysts of the     jaws. <i>Journal of Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery</i>     <strong>11</strong>, 2-12 (2012).</p> <h1>Dysphagia</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>J.A. Cichero and B.E. Murdoch (eds.). Dysphagia:     Foundation, Theory and Practice. John Wiley, Chichester,     2006.</p> <aside>     <p>General textbook, covering all aspects of dysphagia,         not specifically about maxillofacial conditions;         good chapters about developmental aspects of         swallowing (and its disorders).</p> </aside> <p>K.W. Altman (ed.). Dysphagia: Diagnosis and Management.     Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America; Vol. 46, No.     6. Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2013.</p> <p>R.Shaker, P.G. Belafsky, G.N. Postma and C. Easterling     (eds.). Principles of Deglutition. A Multidisciplinary     Text for Swallowing and its Disorders. Springer, New     York Heidelberg, 2013.</p> <p>R. Leonard and K. Kendall (eds.). Dysphagia. Assessment     and Treatment Planning. Plural Publishing, San Diego,     2019.</p> <p>T. Murry, R.L. Carrau and K. Chan. Clinical Management of     Swallowing Disorders. Plural Publishing, 2016.</p> <aside>     <p>A comprehensive discussion of all swallowing         disorders, including sections on head and neck         malignancies.</p> </aside> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>S.A. Kraaijenga et al. Current assessment and treatment     strategies of dysphagia in head and neck cancer     patients: a systematic review of the 2012/13 literature.     <i>Current Opinion in Supportive and Palliative Care</i>     <strong>8</strong>, 152-163 (2014).</p> <aside>     <p>Concludes that there is still a lack of a ‘gold         standard’ for both assessment and treatment         strategies.</p> </aside> <p>S.B. Batth, J.C.Caudell and A.M. Chen. Practical     considerations in reducing swallowing dysfunction     following concurrent chemoradiotherapy with     intensity-modulated radiotherapy for head and neck     cancer. <i>Head &amp; Neck</i> <strong>36</strong>,     291-298 (2014).</p> <aside>     <p>Summary of pro’s and con’s: IMRT schemes can reduce         damage to parotid glands and thus cause less         long-term xerostomia problems, but other structures         may be more exposed, resulting in different         long-term swallowing problems.</p> </aside> <p>C.M. Steele et al. The Influence of Food Texture and     Liquid Consistency Modification on Swallowing Physiology     and Function: A Systematic Review. <i>Dysphagia</i>     <strong>30</strong>, 2-26 (2015).</p> <aside>     <p>Another timely reminder that this is an         under-researched topic; main two conclusions from         systematic review: thickening liquids does reduce         problems with aspiration but increases problems with         residues in pharynx after swallowing.</p> </aside> <p>A.M. Beck et al. Systematic review and evidence based     recommendations on texture modified food and thickened     liquids for adults (above 17 years) with oropharyngeal     dysphagia – An updated clinical guideline. <i>Clinical         Nutrition</i>, in press (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Concludes that there is urgent need for more         research, and that ‘one-size-fits-all’ thickening of         liquids and/or texture-modifying foods is <i>not</i>         strongly recommended; regrets lack of robust         evidence.</p> </aside> <p>L.M. Burkhead, C.M. Sapienza and J.C. Rosenbek.     Strength-Training Exercise in Dysphagia Rehabilitation:     Principles, Procedures, and Directions for Future     Research. <i>Dysphagia</i> <strong>22</strong>, 251-256     (2007).</p> <p>S. Langmore et al. Does PEG Use Cause Dysphagia in Head     and Neck Cancer Patients? <i>Dysphagia</i>     <strong>27</strong>, 251-259 (2012).</p> <aside>     <p>Suggests that dependence on PEG use may lead to         adverse swallowing ability outcomes because of         decreased use of the swallowing musculature.</p> </aside> <p>B.P. Messing et al. Prophylactic Swallow Therapy for     Patients with Head and Neck Cancer Undergoing     Chemoradiotherapy: A Randomized Trial. <i>Dysphagia</i>     <strong>32</strong>, 487-500 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Study seems to indicate short-term, early         improvements from exercises but no significant         long-term advantages.</p> </aside> <p>R. Govender et al. Patient Experiences of Swallowing     Exercises After Head and Neck Cancer: A Qualitative     Study Examining Barriers and Facilitators Using     Behaviour Change Theory. <i>Dysphagia</i>     <strong>32</strong>, 559-569 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Attempt to develop improved exercise protocols and         patient support strategies.</p> </aside> <p>B.R. Pauloski. Rehabilitation of Dysphagia Following Head     and Neck Cancer. <i>Physical Medicine &amp;         Rehabilitation Clinics of North America</i>     <strong>19</strong>, 889-928 (2008).</p> <aside>     <p>An informative and complete overview; exhaustive         bibliography.</p> </aside> <h1>Dysplasia / oral mucosal lesions</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>P. Thomson (ed.). Oral Precancer. Diagnosis and     Management of Potentially Malignant Disorders.     Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, 2012.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>B.T. Yuhan et al. Benign and Malignant Oral Lesions in     Children and Adolescents. An Organized Approach to     Diagnosis and Management. <i>Pediatric Clinics of North         America</i> <strong>65</strong>, 1033-1050 (2018). </p> <p>M.M. Cawley and L.M. Benson. Current trends in managing     oral mucositis. <i>Clinical Journal of Oncology         Nursing</i> <strong>9</strong>, 584-592 (2005).</p> <p>V. de Sanctis et al. Mucositis in head and neck cancer     patients treated with radiotherapy and systemic     therapies: Literature review and consensus statements.     <i>Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology</i>     <strong>100</strong>, 147-168 (2016).</p> <p>B. Oronsky et al. A review of Clinical Radioprotection     and Chemoprotection for Oral Mucositis. <i>Translational         Oncology</i> <strong>11</strong>, 771-778 (2018). </p> <p>F. Marín-Conde et al. Photobiomodulation with low-level     laser therapy reduces oral mucositis caused by head and     neck radio-chemotherapy: prospective randomized     controlled trial. <i>International Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i>, in press (2018).</p> <p>R.W. McCullough. Practice insights on patient care –     management overview for chemoradiation toxic mucositis –     guidelines, guideline-supported therapies and high     potency polymerized cross-linked sucralfate. <i>Journal         of Oncology Pharmacy Practice</i>     <strong>25</strong>, 409-422 (2019).</p> <p>C. Scully. Challenges in predicting which oral mucosal     potentially malignant disease will progress to     neoplasia. <i>Oral Diseases</i> <strong>20</strong>, 1-5     (2014).</p> <aside>     <p>Article highlights lack of clear predictive tools.     </p> </aside> <p>P.J. Thomson et al. Interventional laser surgery for oral     potentially malignant disorders: a longitudinal patient     cohort study. <i>International Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>46</strong>,     337-342 (2017).</p> <p>L. Chau et al. Topical agents for oral cancer     chemoprevention: A systematic review. <i>Oral         Oncology</i> <strong>67</strong>, 153-159 (2017). </p> <aside>     <p>Review concludes that ‘there are a paucity of data         examining topical treatment of oral PMDs         (potentially malignant disorders).’</p> </aside> <p>A. Villa and S. Sonis. Oral leukoplakia remains a     challenging condition. <i>Oral Diseases</i>     <strong>24</strong>, 179-183 (2018).</p> <p>M. Awadallah et al. Management update of potentially     premalignant oral epithelial lesions. <i>Oral Surgery         Oral Medicine Oral Pathology and Radiology</i>     <strong>125</strong>, 628-638 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>North American perspective.</p> </aside> <p>M.A. Olson et al. Oral lichen planus. <i>Clinics in         Dermatology</i> <strong>34</strong>, 495-504 (2016). </p> <p>M. Carrozzo et al. Oral lichen planus: A disease or a     spectrum of tissue reactions? Types, causes, diagnostic     algorithms, prognosis, management strategies.     <i>Periodontology 2000</i> <strong>80</strong>, 105-125     (2019).</p> <p>M.A. Gonzalez-Moles et al. Outcomes of oral lichen planus     and oral lichenoid lesions treated with topical     corticosteroids. <i>Oral Diseases</i>     <strong>24</strong>, 573-579 (2018).</p> <p>S. Leuci et al. Oral autoimmune vesicobullous diseases:     Classification, clinical presentations, molecular     mechanisms, diagnostic algorithms, and management.     <i>Periodontology 2000</i> <strong>9</strong>, 77-88     (2019).</p> <h1>Ectopic teeth</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>M. Tsukiboshi. Autotransplantation of teeth.     Quintessence, Chicago, 2001.</p> <aside>     <p>Beautiful pictures.</p> </aside> <p>D.A. Mitchell and A.N. Kanatas. An Introduction to Oral     and Maxillofacial Surgery (2<sup>nd</sup> ed.). CRC     Taylor and Francis, 2015.</p> <aside>     <p>Several chapters in this general textbook address         issues related to ectopic and impacted teeth.</p> </aside> <p>J.R. Hupp, E. Ellis III and M.R. Tucker. Contemporary     Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (5<sup>th</sup> ed.).     Mosby / Elsevier, 2008.</p> <aside>     <p>This and the previous book in the list illustrate a         number of transatlantic differences of opinion.</p> </aside> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>T.P. Bezerra et al. Prophylaxis versus placebo treatment     for infective and inflammatory complications of surgical     third molar removal: a split-mouth, double-blind,     controlled, clinical trial with amoxicillin. <i>Journal         of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>69</strong>, e333-339 (2011).</p> <p>F. Bruguglio et al. Complications in surgical removal of     impacted mandibular third molars in relation to flap     design: clinical and statistical evaluations.     <i>Quintessence International</i>, <strong>42</strong>,     445-453 (2011).</p> <p>R.W. Carvalho and B.C. do Egito Vasconcelos. Assessment     of factors associated with surgical difficulty during     removal of impacted lower third molars. <i>Journal of         Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>69</strong>, 2714-2721 (2011).</p> <p>K. Martin, S. Nathwani and R. Bunyan. Autotransplantation     of teeth: an evidence-based approach. <i>British Dental         Journal</i> <strong>224</strong>, 861-864 (2018). </p> <p>M. Dalle Carbonare et al. Injury to the inferior alveolar     and lingual nerves in successful and failed     coronectomies: systematic review. <i>British Journal of         Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>55</strong>, 892-898 (2017).</p> <h1>Facial appearance and jaw disproportion</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>J.B. Nadol and M.L. McKenna (eds.). Surgery of the ear     and temporal bone. Lippincott, Williams &amp; Wilkins,     Philadelphia, 2015.</p> <p>B.N. Epker, J.P. Stella and L.C. Fish. Dentofacial     deformities, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., Mosby, St. Louis, 1995. </p> <aside>     <p>An older text, but in its day this was the book         everyone used to learn orthognathic surgery.</p> </aside> <p>L. Mitchell. An introduction to orthodontics,     4<sup>th</sup> ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford,     2013.</p> <aside>     <p>Good on orthodontic components with a useful section         on orthognathic surgery.</p> </aside> <p>P. Ward Booth, S.A. Schendel and J.-E. Hausamen (eds.).     Maxillofacial surgery, Volume 2. Churchill-Livingstone,     Edinburgh, 2007.</p> <aside>     <p>An extensive multiauthor text full of detail and         wonderful obscurities, currently being rewritten.     </p> </aside> <p>J.C. Posnick. Principles and Practice of Orthognathic     Surgery, Elsevier Saunders, St. Louis, 2014.</p> <aside>     <p>Extensive and well organised text; e-book comes with         videos of most common orthognathic surgical         procedures.</p> </aside> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>S. Eremia and M.A. Willoughb. Rhytidectomy.     <i>Dermatologic Clinics</i> <strong>23</strong>, 415-430     (2005).</p> <p>R.J. Choucair and S.T. Hamra. Extended superficial     musculaponeurotic system dissection and composite     rhytidectomy. <i>Clinics in Plastic Surgery</i>     <strong>35</strong>, 607-622 (2008).</p> <p>R.J. Warren, S.J. Aston and B.C. Mendelson. Face lift.     <i>Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery</i>     <strong>128</strong>, 747e-764e (2011).  </p> <p>B.C. Mendelson. Cosmetic surgery for the ageing face.     <i>Australian Family Physician</i> <strong>21</strong>,     907-910, 913-915, 918-919 (1992).</p> <p>J.C. Doucet et al. The presence of mandibular third     molars during sagittal split osteotomies does not     increase the risk of complications. <i>Journal of Oral         and Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>70</strong>,     1935-1943 (2012).</p> <p>B.N. Epker. Modification in sagittal osteotomy of the     mandible. <i>Journal of Oral Surgery</i>     <strong>35</strong>, 157-159 (1977).</p> <aside>     <p>A definitive paper on the final refinement of this         very common and useful technique.</p> </aside> <p>W.R. Proffit, T.A. Turvey and C. Phillips. Orthognathic     surgery: a hierarchy of stability. <i>International         Journal of Adult Orthodontics and Orthognathic         Surgery</i> <strong>11</strong>, 191-204 (1996).</p> <h1>Implants (craniofacial)</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <h1>Infection (abscess, fistula)</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>R.G. Topazian, M.H. Goldberg and J.R. Hupp (eds.). Oral     and Maxillofacial Infections. 4<sup>th</sup> ed.,     Saunders Philadelphia, 2002.</p> <p>J.L.Jones and L.M. Candelaria. <i>Head and Neck         Infections</i>. In: R.I. Fonseca (ed.) Oral and     Maxillofacial Surgery, volume 5, Saunders. Philadelphia,     2000.</p> <p>D. Schlossberg (ed.). Infections of the Head and Neck.     Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>T.R. Flynn. Surgical management of orofacial infections.     <i>Atlas Oral and Maxillofacial Clinics of North         America</i> <strong>8</strong>, 77-100 (2000).</p> <p>D.M. Laskin and R.A. Strauss. Current concepts in the     management of maxillofacial infections. <i>Oral and         Maxillofacial Clinics of North America</i>     <strong>15</strong>, xi-xii (2003).</p> <p>C. Rui-Feng, H. Li-Song H, Z. Ji-Bo and W. Li-Qiu.     Emergency treatment on facial laceration of dog bite     wounds with immediate primary closure: a prospective     randomized trial study. <i>BMC Emergency Medicine</i>     <strong>13</strong> (Suppl. 1) S2 (2013). doi:     10.1186/1471-227X-13-S1-S2.</p> <p>J.A. Lindeboom, E.J. Kuijper, E.S. Bruijnesteijn van     Coppenraet, R. Lindeboom and J.M. Prins. Surgical     excision versus antibiotic treatment for nontuberculous     mycobacterial cervicofacial lymphadenitis in children: a     multicenter, randomized, controlled trial. <i>Clinical         Infectious Diseases</i> <strong>15</strong>,     1057-1064 (2007).</p> <p>J.A. Lindeboom, R. Lindeboom, E.S. Bruijnesteijn van     Coppenraet, E.J. Kuijper J. Tuk and J.M.Prins. Esthetic     outcome of surgical excision versus antibiotic therapy     for nontuberculous mycobacterial cervicofacial     lymphadenitis in children. <i>The Pediatric Infectious         Disease Journal</i> <strong>28</strong>, 1028-1030     (2009).</p> <p>P. Le Conte et al. Recognition and treatment of severe     sepsis in the emergency department: retrospective study     in two French teaching hospitals. <i>BMC Emergency         Medicine</i> <strong>17</strong>, 27 (2017). doi:     10.1186/s12873-017-0133-6</p> <p>M. Singer et al. The Third International Consensus     Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3).     <i>Journal of the American Medical Association</i>     <strong>315</strong>, 801-810 (2016). doi:     10.1001/jama.2016.0287</p> <p>S.P.J. Macdonald et al. Sepsis in the emergency     department – Part 1: Definitions and outcomes.     <i>Emergency Medicine Australasia</i> (2017). doi:     10.1111/1742-6723.12886</p> <aside>     <p>Concise summary and review of 2016 International         Consensus recommendations and definitions.</p> </aside> <p>F. Prechter et al. Sleeping with the enemy:     <i>Clostridium difficile</i> infection in the intensive     care unit. <i>Critical Care</i> <strong>21</strong>, 260     (2017). doi: 10.1186/s13054-017-1819-6</p> <p>A. Mirabile et al. Sepsis in head and neck cancer     patients treated with chemotherapy and radiation:     Literature review and consensus. <i>Critical Reviews in         Oncology / Hematology</i> <strong>95</strong>,     191-213 (2015).</p> <p>J.E.Gotts and M.A. Matthay. Sepsis: pathophysiology and     clinical management. <i>British Medical Journal</i>     <strong>353</strong>:i1585 (2016). doi:     10.1136/bmj.i1585</p> <aside>     <p>A concise state of the art review.</p> </aside> <h1>Jaw joint and facial pain, neuropathies</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>F.M. Dolwick and B. Sanders. TMJ internal derangement and     arthrosis. Mosby, St. Louis, 1985.</p> <aside>     <p>Definitive guide to surgical procedures for internal         derangement.</p> </aside> <p>J.Pedlar and J. Frame. Oral and maxillofacial surgery: an     objective based textbook. Churchill-Livingstone,     Edinburgh, 2001.</p> <aside>     <p>Chapters 17 and 18 provide a clear and generally         accepted guide to TMJ disorders.</p> </aside> <p>R. Gray and Z. Al-Ani. Temporomandibular Disorders: A     Problem-Based Approach. Wiley, Chichester, 2011.</p> <p>M. Milaro (ed.). Trigeminal Nerve Injuries, Springer,     Heidelberg, New York, 2013.</p> <p>Y. Sharav and R. Benoliel (eds.). Orofacial Pain and     Headache. Elsevier, Edinburgh, London, 2008.</p> <p>S.B. McMahon, M. Koltzenburg, I. Tracey and D. Turk     (eds.). Wall and Melzack’s Textbook of Pain,     6<sup>th</sup> ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2013.</p> <aside>     <p>Detailed discussion of general mechanisms,         biochemistry and psychology of pain, along with some         discussions of treatment options – all in 76         chapters.</p> </aside> <p>G. Said. Peripheral Neuropathy &amp; Neuropathic Pain.     tfm Publishing Ltd., Harley, 2015.</p> <p>S.D. Waldman (ed.). Atlas of Common Pain Syndromes.     4<sup>th</sup> ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2019.</p> <p>D.H. Kim et al. Kline and Hudson’s Nerve Injuries:     Operative Results for Major Nerve Injuries, Entrapments     and Tumors, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. Elsevier Health Sciences,     2007.</p> <p>M. Socolovsky, L. Rasulic and R. Midha (eds.). Manual of     Peripheral Nerve Surgery: From the Basics to Complex     Procedures. Thieme, 2017.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>R. Baron, A. Binder and G. Wasner. Neuropathic pain:     diagnosis, pathophysiological mechanisms, and treatment.     <i>Lancet Neurology</i> <strong>9</strong>, 807-819     (2010).</p> <p>P. Coulthard et al. Interventions for iatrogenic inferior     alveolar and lingual nerve injury (Review). <i>The         Cochrane Database of Systematic Review</i>     <strong>4</strong>, CD005293 (2014). DOI:     10.1002/14651858. CD005293.pub2</p> <p>M. Harris et al. Temporomandibular joint and orofacial     pain: clinical and medicolegal management problems.     <i>British Dental Journal</i> <strong>174</strong>,     129-136 (1993).</p> <aside>     <p>A thoughtful and pragmatic review of TMJ dysfunction         from a surgical and psychological perspective.</p> </aside> <p>J.T. Reston and C.M. Turkelson. Meta-analysis of surgical     treatments for temporomandibular articular disorders.     <i>Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>61</strong>, 3-10 (2003).</p> <aside>     <p>Some limited evidence base for joint procedures,         particularly arthroscopy.</p> </aside> <p>M.R. Idle et al. UK temporomandibular joint replacement     database: report on baseline data. <i>British Journal of         Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>52</strong>, 203-207 (2014).</p> <p>A.J. Sidebottom and R. Salha. Management of the     temporomandibular joint in rheumatoid disorders.     <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>51</strong>, 191-198 (2013).</p> <p>A. Arun et al. Nerve regeneration in vascularized     composite allotransplantation: current strategies and     future directions. <i>Plastic and Aesthetic Research</i>     <strong>2</strong>, 226-235 (2015).</p> <p>A.M. Trescot. Cryoanalgesia in interventional pain     management. <i>Pain Physician</i> <strong>6</strong>,     345-360 (2003).</p> <p>D.H. Awal et al. The specialist management of     non-temporomandibular orofacial pain: maxillofacial     surgery’s known unknown? <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i>, in press (2019).</p> <h1>Necrosis (hard and soft tissues)</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>S. Otto (ed.). Medication-Related Osteonecrosis of the     Jaws. Bisphosphonates, Denusomab, and New Agents.     Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015.</p> <p>L. Téot et al (eds.). Skin Necrosis. Springer, 2015.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>J. Zenga et al. Soft palate reconstruction after     radionecrosis: Combined anterolateral thigh adipofascial     and nasoseptal flaps. <i>Auris Nasus Larynx</i>, in     press (2017).</p> <p>N. Rommel et al. Surgical management of severe     osteoradionecrosis of the mandibular bone by using     double free flap reconstruction. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>46</strong>, 148-154 (2018).</p> <p>S. Delanian et al. Complete restoration of refractory     mandibular osteordionecrosis by prolonged treatment with     a pentoxifylline-tocopherol-clodronate combination     (PENTOCLO): a phase II trial. <i>International Journal         of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics</i>     <strong>80</strong>, 832-839 (2011).</p> <p>A. Lyons and N. Ghazali. Osteoradionecrosis of the jaws:     current understanding of its pathophysiology and     treatment. <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial         Surgery</i> <strong>46</strong>, 653-660 (2008).</p> <p>N.M.H. McLeod et al. Pentoxifylline and tocopherol in the     management of patients with osteoradionecrosis: the     Portsmouth experience. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>50</strong>, 41-44     (2012).</p> <p>N.M.H. McLeod et al. Bisphosphonate osteonecrosis of the     jaw: a literature review of UK policies versus     international policies on the management of     bisphosphonate osteonecrosis of the jaw. <i>British         Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>49</strong>, 336-342 (2011).</p> <p>M.S. Epstein et al. Management of     bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis: pentoxifylline     and tocopherol in addition to antimicrobial therapy. An     initial case series. <i>Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine,         Oral Pathology, Oral Radiology, Endodontology</i>     <strong>110</strong>, 593-595 (2010).</p> <p>J.A. Rivero, O. Shamji and A. Kolokythas.     Osteoradionecrosis: a review of pathophysiology,     prevention and pharmacologic management using     pentoxifylline, α-tocopherol, and clodronate. <i>Oral         Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology, Oral         Radiology</i> <strong>124</strong>, 464-471 (2017). </p> <p>M. Martos-Fernández et al. Pentoxifylline, tocopherol and     clodronate for the treatment of mandibular     osteoradionecrosis: a systematic review. <i>Oral         Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology and Oral         Radiology</i> <strong>125</strong>, 431-439 (2018). </p> <p>F.J. Dieleman et al. The efficacy of hyperbaric oxygen     therapy related to the clinical stage of     osteoradionecrosis of the mandible. <i>International         Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>46</strong>, 428-433 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Claims potential benefits for less severe cases.</p> </aside> <p>A. Sultan et al. The Use of Hyperbaric Oxygen for the     Prevention and Management of Osteoradionecrosis of the     Jaw: A Dana-Farber/Brigham and Women’s Cancer Center     Multidisciplinary Guideline. <i>The Oncologist</i>     <strong>22</strong>, 343-350 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Concludes that the use of HBO for the prevention and         management of osteoradionecrosis of ORN is not         recommended.</p> </aside> <p>T. Sønstevold et al. Hyperbaric oxygen treatment did not     significantly affect radiation injury in the mandibular     area of rats. <i>Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>125</strong>, 112-119 (2018).</p> <p>A. Silva Martins et al. Relevant factors for the     treatment outcome and time to healing in     medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws – A     retrospective cohort study. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>45</strong>, 1736-1742 (2017).</p> <p>T. Mücke et al. Free flap reconstruction for patients     with bisphosphonate related osteonecrosis of the jaws     after mandibulectomy. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>44</strong>, 142-147 (2016).</p> <p>B.L. Langdahl and S.H. Ralston. How Basic Science     Discoveries Have Shaped the Treatment of Bone and     Mineral Disorders. <i>Journal of Bone and Mineral         Research</i> <strong>32</strong>, 2324-2330 (2017). </p> <aside>     <p>A concise description of the very welcome short         translation paths from molecular biology laboratory         to clinical practice in the area of bone disorders.     </p> </aside> <p>P. Poxleitner et al. The Prevention of Medication-related     Osteonecrosis of the Jaw. <i>Deutsches Ärzteblatt         International</i> <strong>114</strong>, 63-69     (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Highlights importance of prevention and role of         dentists.</p> </aside> <p>C. Hua et al. Interventions for necrotizing soft tissue     infections in adults (Review). <i>Chochrane Database of         Systematic Reviews</i> <strong>5,</strong> Art. No.     CD011680 (2018). DOI:10.1002/14651858.CD011680.pub.2</p> <aside>     <p>Concludes that currently there is insufficient         evidence for recommendations of a particular         treatment protocol.</p> </aside> <p>J. Dhanda, L. Rennie and R. Shaw. Current trends in the     medical management of osteoradionecrosis using triple     therapy. <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial         Surgery</i> <strong>56</strong>, 401-405 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>Critical review, highlighting lack of robust         evidence.</p> </aside> <p>M.F. McCarty, J.H. O’Keefe and J.D. di Nicolantonio.     Pentoxifylline for vascular health: a brief review of     the literature. <i>Open Heart</i>     <strong>3</strong>:e000365 (2016).</p> <aside>     <p>Brief it may be, but exceptionally clear about the         working of pentoxifylline remaining ‘murky’ and some         misconceptions about its properties (that are only         realised in very high concentrations <i>in             vitro</i>, but not clinically).</p> </aside> <p>G. Favia et al. Medication-related osteonecrosis of the     jaw: Surgical or non-surgical treatment? <i>Oral         Diseases</i> <strong>24</strong>, 238-242 (2018). </p> <aside>     <p>Concludes that where possible, surgical approach is         more beneficial.</p> </aside> <p>L. Ramaglia et al. Stage-specific therapeutic strategies     of medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaws: a     systematic review and meta-analysis of the drug     suspension protocol. <i>Clinical Oral Investigations</i>     <strong>22</strong>, 507-615 (2018).</p> <p>M. Akashi et al. Differences between osteoradionecrosis     and medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. <i>Oral         and Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>22</strong>,     59-63 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>Undoubtedly an important consideration in treatment         selection!</p> </aside> <p>K. Grisar et al. Osteoradionecrosis and     medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw:     similarities and differences. <i>International Journal         of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>45</strong>, 1592-1599 (2016).</p> <p>M. Zirk et al. The impact of surgical intervention and     antibiotics on MRONJ stage II and III – Retrospective     study. <i>Journal of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>45</strong>, 1183-1189 (2017).</p> <p>M. El-Rabbany et al. Effectiveness of treatments for     medication-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: A     systematic review and meta-analysis. <i>The Journal of         the American Dental Association</i>     <strong>148</strong>, 584-594 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Reports higher odds of resolving MRONJ with surgical         than with medical treatment.</p> </aside> <p>S. Caldroney et al. Surgical resection and vascularized     bone reconstruction in advanced stage medication-related     osteonecrosis of the jaw. <i>International Journal of         Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>46</strong>, 871-876 (2017).</p> <p>S. Hayashida et al. Evaluation of the treatment     Strategies for Medication-Related Osteonecrosis of the     Jaws (MRONJ) and the Factors Affecting Treatment     Outcome: A Multicenter Retrospective Study with     Propensity Score Matching Analysis. <i>Journal of Bone         and Mineral Research</i> <strong>32</strong>,     2022-2029 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Reports strong evidence for surgical intervention as         the first-line treatment.</p> </aside> <p>D. Danielsson et al. Quality of life after microvascular     mandibular reconstruction for osteoradionecrosis – A     prospective study. <i>Head &amp; Neck</i>, 1-6 (2019). </p> <aside>     <p>Suggests that microvascular reconstruction may         improve quality of life, in particular pain         reduction.</p> </aside> <p>N. Rommel et al. Surgical management of severe     osteoradionecrosis of the mandibular bone by using     double free flap reconstruction. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>46</strong>, 148-154 (2018).</p> <p>S. Otto et al. Medication-related osteonecrosis of the     jaw: Prevention, diagnosis and management in patients     with cancer and bone metastases. <i>Cancer Treatment         Reviews</i> <strong>69</strong>, 177-187 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>Review, makes several sensible and measured         suggestions about treatment approaches.</p> </aside> <p>S. Aljohani et al. Osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients     treated with denusomab: A multicentre case series.     <i>Journal of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>46</strong>, 1515-1525 (2018).</p> <p>J. Dhanda, L. Rennie and R. Shaw. Current trends in the     medical management of osteoradionecrosis using triple     therapy. <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial         Surgery</i> <strong>56</strong>, 401-405 (2018).</p> <p>R. Shaw et al. HOPON (Hyperbaric Oxygen for the     Prevention of Osteoreadionecrosis): a randomised     controlled trial of hyperbaric oxygen to prevent     osteoradionecrosis of the irradiated mandible: study     protocol for a randomised controlled trial.     <i>Trials</i> <strong>19</strong>:22 (2018).</p> <h1>Palliative and end of life care</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>K.A. Sackheim (ed.). Pain Management and Palliative Care:     A Comprehensive Guide. Springer, 2015.</p> <p>N.I. Cherny, M. Fallon, S. Kaasa, R.K. Portenoy and D.     Currow (eds.). Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine.     Oxford University Press, 2015.</p> <p>M. Watson, C. Lucas, A. Hoy and J. Wells. Oxford Handbook     of Palliative Care. Oxford University press, 2009.</p> <aside>     <p>Not specifically about maxillofacial conditions, but         nevertheless some useful general discussions.</p> </aside> <p>M.W. Wichmann and G. Maddern (eds.). Palliative Surgery.     Springer Verlag Heidelberg, Berlin, 2014.</p> <aside>     <p>Not specifically about maxillofacial conditions, but         includes one chapter on palliative head &amp; neck         surgery.</p> </aside> <p>G. Mitchell. Palliative Care: A Patient-Centered     Approach. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 2018.</p> <p>K. Mannix. With the End in Mind: Dying, Death and Wisdom     in an Age of Denial. Harper Collins UK, 2017.</p> <aside>     <p>A reflection of a palliative care physician after         many years of practice – likely to be a good         ‘self-help read’.</p> </aside> <p>S. Croft, P. Beresford and L. Adshead. Palliative Care,     Social Work and Service Users: Making Life Possible.     Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2006.</p> <aside>     <p>A broader perspective of welfare and societal issues,         including historical perspectives.</p> </aside> <p>S. Sontag. Illness as Metaphor. Vintage Books, New York,     1977.</p> <aside>     <p>A brilliant essay about the power of metaphor,         language and social environment on the experience of         serious illness.</p> </aside> <p>E. Kübler-Ross. On Death and Dying. What the dying have     to teach doctors, nurses, clergy &amp; their own     families. Routledge, 1969.</p> <aside>     <p>Following her observations of the lack of         consideration of end of life in medical schools,         Kübler-Ross wrote this much read ‘story’ of the         stages of grief when faced with serious illness,         much of it based on dialogue with patients. The book         has earned criticism for lack of rigour (but was         never meant to be a structured clinical study) but         remains a text that seems to have resonance with and         relevance for many readers 50 years after its first         edition. It also should be seen in the context of         social developments at the time, for example         coinciding with the opening of the first hospice in         the UK in 1967.</p> </aside> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>B. Chow. Who’s afraid of Susan Sontag? Or, the myths and     metaphors of cancer reconsidered. <i>Social History of         Medicine</i> <strong>14</strong>, 293-312 (2001). </p> <p>T. Heinonen et al. End-of-life care pathway of head and     neck cancer patients: single-institution experience.     <i>European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology</i>     <strong>275</strong>, 545-551 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>A recommendation for early support by palliative and         supportive care, including home care where possible.     </p> </aside> <p>D. Schulman-Green et al. Supporting self-management in     palliative care throughout the cancer care trajectory.     <i>Current Opinion in Supportive and Palliative Care</i>     <strong>12</strong>, 299-307 (2018).</p> <p>F.E. Mott and K.C. Adams. Advance Care Planning and     End-of-Life Issues in Head and Neck Cancer. <i>Journal         of Palliative Care</i> <strong>34</strong>, 18-12     (2019).</p> <h2>Electronic resources</h2> <p>A guide / overview provided by the West Midlands     Palliative Care Physicians <a         href="http://www.wmcares.org.uk/">www.wmcares.org.uk/</a> </p> <h1>Postoperative problems</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>D.W. Eisele and R.V. Smith (eds.). Complications in Head     and Neck Surgery, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., Mosby Elsevier,     Philadelphia, 2009.</p> <h1>Preprosthetic surgery</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>R. Hopkins. A Colour Atlas of Preprosthetic Surgery.     Wolfe medical Publications, London, 1987.</p> <aside>     <p>Long out of print and a bit historic but covers the         entirety of non-implant surgery for dental         prostheses; the book brings alive the history of         these surgical techniques,</p> </aside> <h1>Reconstruction</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>M.L. Urken (ed.). Multidisciplinary Head &amp; Neck     Reconstruction. A Defect-Oriented Approach, Lippincott,     Williams &amp; Wilkins, Baltimore, 2010.</p> <p>M.L. Urken et al. Atlas of the regional and free flaps     for head and neck reconstruction, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed.,     Wolters Kluwer, Baltimore, 2012.</p> <p>K.D. Wolff and F. Hölzle. Raising of microvascular flaps:     a systematic approach, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., Springer,     Berlin, 2011.</p> <p>R. Fernandes. Local and Regional Flaps in Head &amp; Neck     Reconstruction, Wiley Blackwell, Oxford, 2014.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>S. Ariyan. The pectoralis major myocutaneous flap. A     versatile flap for reconstruction in the head and neck.     <i>Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery</i>     <strong>63</strong>, 73-81 (1979).</p> <p>A. Milenovic et al. The pectoralis major flap in head and     neck reconstruction: first 500 patients. <i>Journal of         Craniomaxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>34</strong>,     340-343 (2006).</p> <p>H. Chim et al. Principles of head and neck     reconstruction: an algorithm to guide flap selection.     <i>Seminars on Plastic Surgery</i> <strong>24</strong>,     148-154 (2010).</p> <p>P. Orba et al. The reconstructive matrix: a new paradigm     in reconstructive plastic surgery. <i>Plastic         Reconstructive Surgery</i> <strong>126</strong>,     492-498 (2010).</p> <p>B.T. Goh et al. Mandibular reconstruction in adults: a     review. <i>International Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>37</strong>,     597-605 (2008).</p> <p>F. Hölzle, C. Mohr and K.-D. Wolff. Reconstructive Oral     and Maxillofacial Surgery. <i>Deutsches Ärzteblatt         International</i> <strong>105</strong>, 815-822     (2008).</p> <aside>     <p>Concise overview with useful illustrations.</p> </aside> <p>D.A. Barker et al. Multilayer cell-seeded polymer     nanofiber constructs for soft-tissue reconstruction.     <i>The Journal of the American Medical Association,         Otolaryngology Head Neck Surgery</i>     <strong>139</strong>, 914-922 (2013).</p> <p>T. Mücke et al. Free flap reconstruction for patients     with bisphosphonate related osteonecrosis of the jaws     after mandibulectomy. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>44</strong>, 142-147 (2016).</p> <p>B.A. Anvar, B.C. Evans and G.R. Evans. Lip     reconstruction. <i>Plastic and Reconstructive         Surgery</i> <strong>120</strong>, 57e-64e (2007). </p> <p>P. Yu. Characteristics of the anterolateral thigh flap in     a Western population and its application in head and     neck reconstruction. <i>Head &amp; Neck</i>     <strong>26</strong>, 759-769 (2004).</p> <p>C.H. Huang et al. Comparison of the radial forearm flap     and the thinned anterolateral thigh cutaneous flap for     reconstruction of tongue defects: an evaluation of     donor-site morbidity. <i>Plastic and Reconstructive         Surgery</i> <strong>114</strong>, 1704-1710 (2004). </p> <p>E.W. Bodde et al. Donor-site morbidity after free     vascularized autogenous fibular transfer: subjective and     quantitative analyses. <i>Plastic and Reconstructive         Surgery</i> <strong>111</strong>, 2237-2242 (2003). </p> <p>N. Choi et al. Scapular Tip Free Flap for Head and Neck     Reconstruction. <i>Clinical and Experimental         Otorhinolaryngology</i> <strong>8</strong>, 422-429     (2015).</p> <p>C. Goetz et al. Temporary tracheotomy in microvascular     reconstruction in maxillofacial surgery: Benefit or     threat? <i>Journal of Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery</i>     <strong>47</strong>, 642-646 (2019).</p> <h1>Salivary gland problems</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>R.A.Cawson, M.J.Gleeson and J.W.Eveson. Pathology and     surgery of the salivary glands. Isis Medical Media,     Oxford, 1997.</p> <p>E.R. Carlson and R.A. Ord (eds.). Salivary Gland     Pathology, Diagnosis and Management, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed.,     Wiley Blackwell, 2015.</p> <p>M. McGurk and A. Renehan. Controversies in the Management     of Salivary Gland Disease. Oxford University Press,     Oxford, 2001.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>G. Bavikatte , P. L. Sit and A. Hassoon. Management of     Drooling of Saliva. <i>British Journal of Medical         Practitioners</i> <strong>5(1)</strong>, a507     (2012).</p> <aside>     <p>A concise and straightforward overview of causes and         treatment options; easy to read.</p> </aside> <p>W.G. Albergotti, S.A. Nguyen, J. Zenk and M.B. Gillespie.     Extracapsular dissection for benign parotid tumours: a     meta-analysis. <i>Laryngoscope</i> <strong>122</strong>,     1954-1960 (2012).</p> <p>R.R. Cuiman, W. Oels, R. Jaussi and P. Dost. Outcome,     general and symptom-specific quality of life after     various types of parotid resection. <i>Laryngoscope</i>     <strong>122</strong>, 1254-1261 (2012).</p> <p>A.J. Sood et al. Facial Nerve Monitoring during     Paridectomy. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.     <i>Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery</i>     <strong>152</strong>, 631-637 (2015).</p> <h1>Trauma, hard and soft tissues / fractures and soft     tissue damage</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>N. Rowe and J. Williams. Maxillofacial injuries. Volumes     I and II, Churchill-Livingstone, Edinburgh. 1985.</p> <aside>     <p>Although quite an old text and inevitably out of date         in any areas, this was for many years the definitive         text on maxillofacial trauma.</p> </aside> <p>M. Yaremchuk, J. Gruss and P. Manson. Rigid fixation of     the craniomaxillofacial skeleton. Butterworth-Heinemann,     1992.</p> <aside>     <p>Similar to the book by Rowe and Williams, but from an         American perspective.</p> </aside> <p>I. Greaves, K. Porter and J. Ryan. Trauma care manual.     Arnold. London, 2001.</p> <aside>     <p>Chapter 12 has a nice overview of the primary         treatment of maxillofacial trauma.</p> </aside> <p>M. Perry and S. Holmes (eds.). Atlas of Operative     Maxillofacial Trauma Surgery – primary repair of facial     injuries. Springer, Heidelberg, Berlin, 2015.</p> <p>M. Perry, A. Brown and P. Banks. Fractures of the Facial     Skeleton, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. John Wiley &amp; Sons,     2015.</p> <p>J.P. Wardrope and A.R. Smith. The management of wounds     and burns. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990.</p> <aside>     <p>Old but classic text.</p> </aside> <p>C. Stone. Plastic surgery: facts. Greenwich Medical     Media, London, 2001.</p> <aside>     <p>Lots of useful but very superficial information.</p> </aside> <p>M.S. Granick and L. Téot (eds.). Surgical Wound Healing     and Management, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed. Thieme Verlag, 2012. </p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>K. Abdel-Galil and R. Loukota. Fractures of the     mandibular condyle: evidence base and current concepts     of management. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>48</strong>,     520-526 (2010).</p> <p>P.D. Benson et al. The use of immediate bone grafting in     reconstruction of clinically infected mandibular     fractures: bone grafts in the presence of pus.     <i>Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>64</strong>, 122-126 (2006).</p> <p>P. Mehra, E. van Heulekom and D.A. Cottrell. Rigid     internal fixation of infected mandibular fractures.     <i>Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>67</strong>, 1046-1051 (2009).</p> <p>D.A. Mitchell. A multicentre audit of unilateral     fractures of the mandibular condyle. <i>British Journal         of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>35</strong>, 230-236 (1997).</p> <p>M.F. Zide and J.N. Kent. Indications for open reduction     of mandibular condyle fractures. <i>Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>41</strong>, 89-98     (1983).</p> <p>A.R. Cobb, N.O. Jeelani and P.R. Ayliffe. Orbital     fractures in children. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>45</strong>, 41-46     (2013).</p> <p>D. Coletti and R.A. Ord. Treatment rationale for     pathological fractures of the mandible: a series of 44     fractures. <i>International Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>37</strong>,     215-222 (2008).</p> <p>J.J. Downie et al. Prospective study of morbidity     associated with open reduction and internal fixation of     the fractured condyle by the transparotid approach.     <i>British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>47</strong>, 370-373 (2009).</p> <p>U. Eckelt et al. Open versus closed treatment of     fractures of the mandibular condylar process: a     prospective randomised multi-centre study. <i>Journal of         Craniomaxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>34</strong>,     306-314 (2006).</p> <p>E. Ellis. Treatment methods for fractures of the     mandibular angle. <i>International Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>28</strong>,     243-252 (1999).</p> <p>E. Ellis et al. Surgical complications with open     treatment of mandibular condylar process fractures.     <i>Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>58</strong>, 950-958 (2000).</p> <p>A.J.L. Gear et al. Treatment modalities for mandibular     angle fractures. <i>Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial         Surgery</i> <strong>63</strong>, 655-663 (2005).</p> <p>H.G. Luhr et al. Results of treatment of fractures of the     atrophic edentulous mandible by compression plating: a     retrospective evaluation of 84 consecutive cases.     <i>Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>54</strong>, 250-254 (1996).</p> <p>B.T. Evans and A.A.C. Webb. Post-traumatic orbital     reconstruction: anatomical landmarks and the concept of     the deep orbit. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>45</strong>,     183-189 (2007).</p> <p>G. Kovacs and N. Sowers. Airway Management in Trauma.     <i>Emergency Management Clinics of North America</i>     <strong>36</strong>, 61-84 (2018).</p> <p>M. Perry. Maxillofacial trauma: developments, innovations     and controversies. <i>Injury</i> <strong>40</strong>,     1252-1259 (2009).</p> <p>National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence     (NICE) clinical guideline 56. Head injury: triage,     assessment, investigation and early management of head     injury in infants, children and adults. <i>National         Collaborating Centre for Acute Care</i> (2007).</p> <p>Managing bites from humans and other mammals. <i>Drugs         and Therapeutics Bulletin</i> <strong>42,</strong>     67-70 (2004).</p> <p>C.L. Allonby-Neve and C.D. Okereke. Current management of     facial wounds in UK accident and emergency departments.     <i>Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of         England</i> <strong>88</strong>, 144-150 (2006).</p> <p>F. Ardeshirpour, D.A. Shaye and P.A. Hilger. Improving     posttraumatic facial scars. <i>Otolaryngologic Clinics         of North America</i> <strong>46</strong>, 867-991     (2013).</p> <p>G. Favia et al. Accelerated wound healing of oral soft     tissues and angiogenic effect induced by a pool of amino     acids combined to sodium hyaluronate (AMINOGAM).     <i>Journal of Biological Regulators and Homeostatic         Agents</i> <strong>22</strong>, 109-116 (2008).</p> <p>K.L. Rieck, W.J. Fillmore and K.S. Ettinger. Late     revision or correction of facial trauma-related soft     tissue deformities. <i>Oral and Maxillofacial Clinics of         North America</i> <strong>25</strong>, 697-713     (2013).</p> <h1>Trismus</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>M. Kapre and S. Kothe. Surgery of Trismus in Oral     Submucous Fibrosis: An Atlas. Springer Science +     Business Media, 2018.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>A.D. Rapidis, P.U. Dijkstra, J.L.N. Roodenburg, J.P.     Rodrigo, A. Rinaldo, P. Strojan, R.P. Takes and A.     Ferlito. Trismus in patients with head and neck cancer:     etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management. <i>Clinical         Otolaryngology</i> <strong>40</strong>, 516-526     (2015).</p> <aside>     <p>A concise and well-structured review article.</p> </aside> <p>M.J. Garnett, F.S. Nohl and S.C. Barclay. Management of     patients with reduced oral aperture and mandibular     hypomobility (trismus) and implications for operative     dentistry. <i>British Dental Journal</i>     <strong>204</strong>, 125-131 (2008).</p> <aside>     <p>A general overview, with some comments from the         dentistry / management and restoration point of         view.</p> </aside> <p>D.M. Hartl et al. Botulinum toxin for radiation-induced     facial pain and trismus. <i>Otolaryngology – Head and         Neck Surgery</i> <strong>138</strong>, 459-463     (2008).</p> <p>D.H. Shulman et al. Treating trismus with dynamic     splinting: a cohort, case series. <i>Advances in         Therapy</i> <strong>25</strong>, 9-16 (2008).</p> <p>A. de Pablo et al. Trismus surgical release and free flap     reconstruction after radiation therapy in oral and     oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. <i>Journal of         Surgical Oncology</i> <strong>117</strong>, 142-149     (2018).</p> <h1>Tumour (metastases, haematological, other)</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>W.G. Jiang and R.E. Mansel (eds.). Cancer Metastasis,     Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms and Clinical     Intervention. Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York,     2004.</p> <aside>     <p>Review covering several general aspects of         metastasis, not specifically about head &amp; neck         malignancies.</p> </aside> <p>J. Myers (ed.). Oral Cancer Metastasis. Springer, New     York, 2010.</p> <aside>     <p>A mix of clinical and laboratory reports, in part         with conflicting results and statements.</p> </aside> <p>J.A. Werner and R.K. Davis (eds.). Metastases in Head and     Neck Cancer. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004.</p> <p>J.P. Harris and M.H. Weisman (eds.). Head and Neck     Manifestations of Systemic Disease. Taylor and Francis,     Boca Raton, 2007.</p> <p>I.J. Diel, M. Kaufmann and G. Bastert (eds.). Metastatic     Bone Disease; Fundamental and Clinical Aspects. Springer     Science &amp; Business Media, 2012.</p> <p>V. Denaro, A. Di Martine and A. Piccioli (eds.).     Management of Bone Metastases: A multidisciplinary     guide. Springer, 2018.</p> <p>M. Joerger and M. Gnant (eds.). Prevention of Bone     Metastases. Springer Sciene &amp; Business Media, 2012. </p> <aside>     <p>A slightly overly optimistic book title: the bulk of         the book is about management of bone metastases with         bisphosphonates and denusomab; with a few         preliminary observations that these antiresorptive         drugs may have additional benefits in preventing the         establishment of bone metastases. In 2019 there is         no convincing evidence or confirmation about that,         but these drugs do have an important role in the         management of bone metastases.</p> </aside> <p>H.M. Mehanna and K.K. Ang. Head and Neck Cancer     recurrence: Evidence-based, Multidisciplinary     Management. Thieme, Stuttgart, 2012.</p> <p>R.A.J. Spence, R. Hay and P. Johnston (eds.). Infection     in the cancer patient – a practical guide. Oxford     University Press Inc., New York 2006.</p> <aside>     <p>Not specific about any particular type of malignancy         but several generally relevant chapters.</p> </aside> <p>H.M. Pinedo and J. Verwell (eds.). Treatment of Soft     Tissue Sarcomas. Vol. 44 of Cancer Treatment and     Research. Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 2012. </p> <p>M.F. Brennan et al. Management of Soft Tissue Sarcoma,     2<sup>nd</sup> ed. Springer, 2016.</p> <p>S.P. D’Angelo and S.W. Pollack (eds.). Immunotherapy of     Sarcoma. Springer International Publishing, 2018.</p> <aside>     <p>A report about ‘work in progress’.</p> </aside> <p>Z. Gooi and N. Agrawal (eds.) Difficult Decisions in Head     and Neck Oncologic Surgery. Springer, 2019.</p> <aside>     <p>A book full of contemporary questions &amp; dilemmas         – and attempts to provide rational answers, for the         time being.</p> </aside> <p>M.M. Olsen and L.J. Zitella (eds.), Hematologic     Malignancies in Adults. Oncology Nursing Society,     Pittsburgh, 2013.</p> <p>S. O’Brien, J.M. Vose and H.M. Kantarjian (eds.).     Management of Hematological Malignancies. Cambridge     University Press, 2010.</p> <p>S. Bailey and R. Skinner (eds.). Paediatric Haematology     and Oncology. Oxford University Press, 2010.</p> <p>D. Green and H. Wallace (eds.). Late Effects of Childhood     Cancer. CRC Press, 2003.</p> <p>D.A. Sallman et al. Handbook of Hematologic Malignancies.     Springer Publishing Company, 2016.</p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>C. Galy-Bernadoy and R. Garrel. Head and neck soft-tissue     sarcoma in adults. <i>European Annals of         Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck di</i>seases     <strong>133</strong>, 37–42 (2016).</p> <aside>     <p>Concise and up-to-date review.</p> </aside> <p>L.-V. Vassiliou et al. Head and neck sarcomas: A single     institute series. <i>Oral Oncology</i>     <strong>65</strong>, 16-22 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Review and narrative, covering 13 years of cases         (soft and hard tissue sarcomas) at UCLH London.</p> </aside> <p>R.W.F. Breakey et al. The surgical management of head and     neck sarcoma: The Newcastle experience. <i>Journal of         Plastic, Reconstructive &amp; Aesthetic Surgery</i>     <strong>70</strong>, 78-84 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Emphasises the need for radical surgical resection as         first-line treatment of soft tissue sarcomas.</p> </aside> <p>B. Tudor-Green, R. Gomez and P.A. Brennan. Current update     on the diagnosis and management of head and neck soft     tissue sarcomas. <i>Journal of Oral Pathology &amp;         Medicine</i> <strong>46</strong>, 674-679 (2017). </p> <p>M. Zacher et al. Primary leiomyosarcoma of the skin: a     comprehensive review on diagnosis and treatment.     <i>Medical Oncology</i> <strong>35</strong>, 135 (2018). </p> <p>A. Arshi, B.A. Tajudeen and M.St. John. Malignant     peripheral nerve sheath tumors of the head and neck:     Demographics, clinicopathologic features, management,     and treatment outcomes. <i>Oral Oncology</i>     <strong>51</strong>, 1088-1094 (2015).</p> <aside>     <p>Overview of current thinking and approaches.</p> </aside> <p>A. Kanatas et al. Schwannomas of the head and neck.     <i>Oncology Reviews</i> <strong>3</strong>, 107-111     (2012).</p> <p>Z.Y. Wang et al. Facial and lower cranial nerve function     preservation in lateral approach for craniocervical     schwannomas. <i>European Archives of         Otorhinolaryngology</i> <strong>272</strong>,     2207-2212 (2015).</p> <p>R. Patlola et al. Carotid body tumour. <i>International         Journal of Cardiology</i> <strong>143</strong>,     e7-e10 (2010).</p> <p>B.J. Davidson et al. Posterior triangle metastases of     squamous cell carcinoma of the upper aerodigestive     tract. <i>American Journal of Surgery</i>     <strong>166</strong>, 395-398 (1993).</p> <p>R. Lindberg. Distribution of cervical lymph node     metastases from squamous cell carcinoma of the upper     respiratory and digestive tracts. <i>Cancer</i>     <strong>29</strong>, 1446-1449 (1972).</p> <p>R.P. Takes et al. Distant metastases from head and neck     squamous cell carcinoma, Part I. Basic aspects. <i>Oral         Oncology</i> <strong>48</strong>, 775-779 (2012). </p> <p>R. de Bree et al. Distant metastases from head and neck     squamous cell carcinoma, Part II. Diagnosis. <i>Oral         Oncology</i> <strong>48</strong>, 780-786 (2012). </p> <p>M. Haigentz Jr. et al. Distant metastases from head and     neck squamous cell carcinoma, Part II. Treatment.     <i>Oral Oncology</i> <strong>48</strong>, 787-793     (2012).</p> <p>A. Ferlito et al. Changing concepts in the surgical     management of the cervical node metastasis. <i>Oral         Oncology</i> <strong>39</strong>, 429-435 (2003). </p> <p>M. Garg, B. Tudor-Green and B. Biase. Current thinking in     management of the neck (including contralateral neck) in     ipsilateral recurrent or second primary oral squamous     cell carcinoma. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i>, in press (2019).</p> <p>B. Green et al. Current surgical management of metastases     in the neck from mucosal squamous cell carcinoma of the     head and neck. <i>British Journal of Oral and         Maxillofacial Surgery</i> <strong>54</strong>,     135-140 (2016).</p> <aside>     <p>A review of current practice; with an outlook to         de-escalating strategies for reduced morbidity,         based on improved imaging methodologies.</p> </aside> <p>R. Maggiore et al. The Older Adult with Locoregionally     Advanced Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma:     Knowledge Gaps and Future Direction in Assessment and     Treatment. <i>International Journal of Radiation         Oncology, Biology and Physics</i>     <strong>98</strong>, 868-993 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Points out common mental health issues and         underrepresentation of this patient group in         clinical trials.</p> </aside> <p>S.C. Kaste et al. Impact of Radiation and Chemotherapy on     Risk of Dental Abnormalities. <i>Cancer</i> 5817-5827     (2009).</p> <p>M.-C. Valéra et al. Oral complications and dental care in     children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. <i>Journal         of Oral Pathology &amp; Medicine</i>     <strong>44</strong>, 483-489 (2015).</p> <p>B. Oronsky et al. A review of Clinical Radioprotection     and Chemoprotection for Oral Mucositis. <i>Translational         Oncology</i> <strong>11</strong>, 771-778 (2018). </p> <p>P.J. Stiff et al. Long-Term Safety Outcome in Patients     with Hematological Malignancies Undergoing Autologous     Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation treated with     Palifermin to Prevent Oral Mucositis. <i>Biology of         Blood and Marrow Transplantation</i>     <strong>22</strong>, 164-169 (2016).</p> <p>F. Mazhari, A.S. Shirazi and M. Shabzendehdar. Management     of oral mucositis in paediatric patients receiving     cancer therapy: A systematic review and meta-analysis.     <i>Pediatric Blood &amp; Cancer</i>     <strong>66</strong>:327402 (2019).</p> <h1>Vascular abnormalities</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>R. Mattassi, D.A. Loose and M. Vaghi (eds.). Hemangioma     and Vascular Malformations. An Atlas of Diagnosis and     Treatments, 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., Springer Milano     Heidelberg, 2015.</p> <p>Y.-W. Kim, B.-B. Lee, W.F. Yakes and Y.-S. Do. Congenital     Vascular Malformations: A Comprehensive Review of     Current Management, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2017. </p> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>S.C. Nair. Vascular Anomalies of the Head and Neck     Region. <i>Journal of Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery</i>     <strong>17</strong>, 1-12 (2018).</p> <aside>     <p>General review / overview with some useful selected         references.</p> </aside> <p>S.E.R. Horbach et al. Sclerotherapy for low-flow vascular     malformations of the head and neck: A systematic review     of sclerosing agents. <i>Journal of Plastic,         Reconstructive &amp; Aesthetic Surgery</i>     <strong>69</strong>, 295-304 (2016).</p> <p>M. Sadick et al. Interdisciplinary Management of Head and     Neck Vascular Anomalies: Clinical Presentation,     Diagnostic Findings and Minimalinvasive Therapy.     <i>European Journal of Radiology Open</i>     <strong>4</strong>, 63-68 (2017).</p> <p>L.M. Buckmiller, G.T. Richter and J.Y. Sun. Diagnosis and     management of hemangioma and vascular malformations of     the head and neck. <i>Oral Diseases</i>     <strong>16</strong>, 405-418 (2010).</p> <p>C. Léauté-Labrèze, J.I. Harper and P.H. Hoeger. Infantile     haemangioma. <i>Lancet</i> <strong>390</strong>, 85-94     (2017).</p> <p>W.A. Wohlgemuth et al. Ethanolgel sclerotherapy of venous     malformations improves health-related quality-of-life in     adults and children – results of a prospective study.     <i>European Journal of Radiology</i>     <strong>27</strong>, 2482-2488 (2017).</p> <p>H. Lackner et al. Sirolimus for the treatment of children     with various complicated vascular anomalies. <i>European         Journal of Pediatrics</i> <strong>174</strong>,     1579-1594 (2015).</p> <h1>Xerostomia</h1> <h2>Textbooks</h2> <p>G. Carpenter (ed.). Dry Mouth – A Clinical Guide on     Causes, Effects and Treatments. Springer, Berlin,     Heidelberg, 2015.</p> <aside>     <p>Excellent and measured account of all current aspects         of xerostomia (giving a European perspective).</p> </aside> <h2>Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h2> <p>V. Mercadante, A.al Hamad, G. Lodi, S. Porter and S.     Fedele. Interventions for the management of     radiotherapy-induced xerostomia and hyposalivation: A     systematic review and meta-analysis. <i>Oral         Oncology</i> <strong>66</strong>, 64-74 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Concludes that only for pilocarpine and cevimeline         there is sufficient evidence as treatment options.     </p> </aside> <p>S.A. Bhide. A.B. Miah, K.J. Harrington, K.L. Newbold and     C.M. Nutting. Radiation-induced Xerostomia:     Pathophysiology, Prevention and Treatment. <i>Clinical         Oncology</i> <strong>21</strong>, 737-744 (2009). </p> <aside>     <p>A concise summary.</p> </aside> <p>S.B. Jensen et al. A systematic review of salivary gland     hypofunction and xerostomia induced by cancer therapies:     prevalence, severity and impact on quality of life.     <i>Support Care Cancer</i> <strong>18</strong>,     1039-1060 (2010).</p> <p>S.B. Jensen et al. A systematic review of salivary gland     hypofunction and xerostomia induced by cancer therapies:     management strategies and economic impact. <i>Support         Care Cancer</i> <strong>18</strong>, 1061-1079     (2010).</p> <p>I. Thorne and N. Sutcliffe. Sjögren’s syndrome.     <i>British Journal of Hospital Medicine</i>     <strong>78</strong>, 438-442 (2017).</p> <p>M. Ramos-Casals, A.G. Tzioufas, J.H. Stone, A. Sisó and     X. Bosch. Treatment of Primary Sjögren Syndrome. A     Systematic Review. J<i>ournal of the American Medical         Association</i> <strong>304</strong>, 452-460     (2010).</p> <p>R. Pinna, G. Campus, E. Cumbo, I. Mura and E. Milia.     Xerostomia induced by radiotherapy: an overview of the     physiopathology, clinical evidence, and management of     the oral damage. <i>Therapeutics and Clinical Risk         Management</i> <strong>11</strong>, 171-188 (2015). </p> <aside>     <p>A systematic review.</p> </aside> <p>A.A. Owosho et al. The role of parotid gland irradiation     in the development of severe hyposalivation (xerostomia)     after intensity-modulated radiation therapy for head and     neck cancer: Temporal patterns, risk factors, and     testing the QUANTEC guidelines. <i>Journal of         Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery</i>     <strong>45</strong>, 595-600 (2017).</p> <aside>     <p>Recommends reduction of the use of chemoradiotherapy         and limiting the radiation dose delivered to the         parotid glands to less than 25 Gy, if possible.</p> </aside> <p>C.M. Nutting et al. Parotid-sparing intensity modulated     versus conventional radiotherapy in head and neck cancer     (PARSPORT): a phase 3 multicentre randomised controlled     trial. <i>Lancet Oncology</i> <strong>12</strong>,     127-136 (2011).</p> <aside>     <p>Report on trial results – significantly improved         recovery of saliva secretion after IMRT compared         with conventional radiotherapy.</p> </aside> <p>T.H. Wasserman et al. Influence of intravenous amifostine     on xerostomia, tumor control, and survival after     readiotherapy for head and neck cancer: 2 year follow-up     of a prospective, randomized, phase III trial.     <i>International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology,         Physics</i> <strong>63</strong>, 985-990 (2005).</p> <p>A. Eisbruch. Amifostine in the Treatment of Head and Neck     Cancer: Intravenous Administration, Subcutaneous     Administration, or None of the Above. <i>Journal of         Clinical Oncology</i> <strong>29</strong>, 119-121     (2011).</p> <p>D.N. Silva Marques et al. Effects of gustatory stimulants     of salivary secretion on salivary pH and flow in     patients with Sjögren’s syndrome: a randomized     controlled trial. <i>Journal of Oral Pathology &amp;         Medicine</i> <strong>40</strong>, 785-792 (2011). </p> <p>J. Gu et al. Effect of amifostine in head and neck cance     patients treated with radiotherapy: a systematic review     and meta-analysis based on randomized controlled trials.     <i>PloS One</i> <strong>9</strong>, 95068 (2014).</p> <p>G.C. Jaguar et al. Double blind randomized prospective     trial of bethanechol in the preventon of     radiation-induced salivary gland dysfunction in head and     neck cancer patients. <i>Radiotherapy and Oncology</i>     <strong>115</strong>, 253-256 (2015).</p> <p>A.J. Sood et al. Salivary gland transfer to prevent     radiation-induced xerostomia: a systematic review and     meta-analysis. <i>Oral Oncology</i> <strong>50</strong>,     77-83 (2014).</p> <p>J.R. Verrone et al. Impact of intraoral stent on the side     effects of radiotherapy for oral cancer. <i>Head and         Neck</i> <strong>35</strong>, 213-217 (2013).</p> <hr /> <p>Extracts and modified extracts of D.A.Mitchell and A.N.     Kanatas; An Introduction to Oral and Maxillofacial     Surgery, 2<sup>nd</sup> Ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton, © by     D.A.Mitchell, 2015, have been reproduced in some     subsections of A-Z of surgery with permission of the     author.</p>
