---
id: 5941aecef20f806a274d2404
uri: help/oral-food/further-reading
title: Oral food
type: further
order: 0
hide: true
updated_at: 2019-03-03T12:38:44Z
created_at: 2017-06-14T21:46:54Z
contents:
  - text: "Textbooks"
    id: textbooks
  - text: "Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)"
    id: journal-articles-peer-reviewed-literature
  - text: "Electronic resources"
    id: electronic-resources
---

<h1 id="textbooks">Textbooks</h1>
<p>J. Chen and L. Engelen (eds.). Food Oral Processing: Fundamentals
    of Eating and Sensory Perception. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester,
    2012.</p>
<p>J. Chen and A. Rosenthal (eds.). Modifying Food Texture. Volume
    2, Sensory Analysis, Consumer Requirements and Preferences.
    Woodhead Publishing Elsevier, Cambridge, 2015.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Not specifically about texture modification with a view to
        dysphagia but nevertheless a useful compilation of contemporary
        approaches to study food textures.</p>
</aside>
<p>A.B. Marshall. The Book of Ices. Marshall School of Cookery,
    1885. S. Szabo, epubli GmbH Berlin (reprint), 2014.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Nothing new under the sun as far as savoury ice creams are
        concerned; anybody for spinach ice cream, version <i>anno</i>        1885? This is a truly interesting little cookbook and
        a good reminder that many of the ‘boxes’ that restrain
        our thinking are fairly recent inventions.</p>
</aside>
<p>R. Shaker, P.G. Belafsky, G.N. Postma and C. Easterling (eds.).
    Principles of Deglutition. A Multidisciplinary Text for Swallowing
    and its Disorders. Springer, New York Heidelberg, 2013.</p>
<p>J. Webster-Gandy, A. Madden and M. Holdsworth. Oxford Handbook
    of Nutrition and Dietetics. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
    2006.</p>
<aside>
    <p>A summary of the current &amp; conventional views.</p>
</aside>
<h1 id="journal-articles-peer-reviewed-literature">Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h1>
<p>A.W. Brown et al. Unscientific Beliefs about Scientific Topics
    in Nutrition. <i>Advances in Nutrition</i> <strong>5</strong>,
    563-565 (2014).</p>
<aside>
    <p>A polemic and reflection on how to improve the quality of
        research into nutrition.</p>
</aside>
<p>C. Laur et al. Nutrition Care after Discharge from Hospital:
    An Exploratory Analysis from the More-2-Eat Study. <i>Healthcare</i>    <strong>6</strong>, 9-22 (2018). doi:10.3390/healthcare6010009</p>
<aside>
    <p>Probably neither a surprise nor a consolation that nutritional
        aftercare ‘with room for improvements’ is not an exclusive
        problem for maxillofacial patients.</p>
</aside>
<p>J.M. Patterson et al. Head and neck cancer and dysphagia; caring
    for carers. <i>Psycho-Oncology</i> <strong>22</strong>, 1915-1820
    (2013).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Similar to the previous paper: probably neither a surprise
        nor a consolation that carers for HN cancer patients
        themselves need more &amp; better support.</p>
</aside>
<p>I.A. Humbert and J.-A. Robbins. Normal Swallowing and Functional
    Magnetic Resonance Imaging: A Systematic Review. <i>Dysphagia</i>    <strong>22</strong>, 266-275 (2007).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Review highlights apparent common patterns of brain activity
        in healthy adults during swallowing.</p>
</aside>
<p>T.J. Lapis, M.H. Penner and J. Lim. Humans Can Taste Glucose
    Oligomers Independent of the hT1R2/hT1R3 Sweet Taste Receptor.
    <i>Chemical Sens</i>es <strong>41</strong>, 755-762 (2016).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Initial findings and suggestions that there may also be a
        taste sensor for ‘starchy’ foods.</p>
</aside>
<p>B.H. Campbell et al. Aspiration, weight loss and quality of life
    in head and neck cancer survivors. <i>Archives of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery</i>    <strong>130</strong>, 1100-1103 (2004).</p>
<p>M.M. Cawley and L.M. Benson. Current trends in managing oral
    mucositis. <i>Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing</i> <strong>9</strong>,
    584-592 (2005).</p>
<p>L. Arribas et al. Nutritional changes in patients with locally
    advanced head and neck cancer during treatment. <i>Oral Oncology</i>    <strong>71</strong>, 67-74 (2017).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Study reports significantly deteriorated nutritional status
        after radiotherapy, despite intensive nutritional support.</p>
</aside>
<p>E. Cereda et al. Nutritional counselling with or without systematic
    use of oral nutritional supplements in head and neck cancer
    patients undergoing radiotherapy. <i>Radiotherapy and Oncology</i>,
    in press (2017).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Study reports positive effects of nutritional counselling,
        quite the opposite of the previously quoted study (see
        above).</p>
</aside>
<p>T. Brown et al. Impact of early prophylactic feeding on long
    term tube dependency outcomes in patients with head and neck
    cancer. <i>Oral Oncology</i> <strong>72</strong>, 17-25 (2017).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Inconclusive evidence, either way.</p>
</aside>
<p>A.W. Rademaker et al. Eating ability in head and neck cancer
    patients after treatment with chemoradiation: a 12-month
    follow-up study accounting for dropout. <i>Head and Neck Journal</i>    <strong>25</strong>, 1034-1041 (2003).</p>
<p>K. Matsuo and J.B. Palmer. Coordination of Mastication, Swallowing
    and Breathing. <i>The Japanese Dental Science Review</i>    <strong>45</strong>, 31-40 (2009).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Full description of the chronology of events of the normal
        swallowing process, some hints at various dysfunctions.</p>
</aside>
<p>E. Irune et al. Treatment-related dysgeusia in head and neck
    cancer patients. <i>Cancer Treatment Reviews</i> <strong>40</strong>,
    1106–1117 (2014).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Summary of literature on treatment related temporary and
        permanent taste changes.</p>
</aside>
<p>N. Cousins et al. A systematic review of interventions for eating
    and drinking problems following treatment for head and neck
    cancer suggests a need to look beyond swallowing and trismus.
    <i>Oral Oncology</i> <strong>49</strong>, 387-400 (2013).</p>
<p>M.-A. Peyron et al. Role of Physical Bolus Properties as Sensory
    Inputs in the</p>
<p>Trigger of Swallowing. <i>PLoS ONE</i> <strong>6</strong>, e21167
    (2011).</p>
<aside>
    <p>An attempt at rationalising desirable bolus properties for
        triggering the swallowing process, some useful ideas
        for future improvements.</p>
</aside>
<p>N.M. Rogus-Pulia et al. Bolus effects on patient awareness of
    swallowing difficulty and swallow physiology after chemoradiation
    for head and neck cancer. <i>Head and Neck</i> <strong>37</strong>,
    1122-1129 (2015).</p>
<p>C. Loret. Using Sensory Properties of Food to Trigger Swallowing:
    A Review. <i>Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition</i>    <strong>55</strong>, 140–145 (2015).</p>
<aside>
    <p>The main conclusion: much more work and research necessary.</p>
</aside>
<p>J. Chen. Food oral processing – A review. <i>Food Hydrocolloids</i>    <strong>23</strong>, 1-25 (2009).</p>
<aside>
    <p>An attempt to relate oral food processing and swallowing
        to physical properties of foods; some interesting correlations
        and ideas.</p>
</aside>
<p>C.M. Steele et al. The Influence of Food Texture and Liquid Consistency
    Modification on Swallowing Physiology and Function: A Systematic
    Review.</p>
<p><i>Dysphagia</i> DOI 10.1007/s00455-014-9578-x (2014).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Another timely reminder that this is an under-researched
        topic; the main two conclusions from systematic review:
        thickening liquids does reduce problems with aspiration
        but may increase problems with residues in pharynx after
        swallowing.</p>
</aside>
<p>C.E.A. Barbon and C.M. Steele. Efficacy of Thickened Liquids
    for Eliminating Aspiration in Head and Neck Cancer: A Systematic
    Review. <i>Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery</i>, 1-8
    (2014).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Highlights the need to assess efficacy of thickeners for
        HN cancer patients.</p>
</aside>
<p>A.M. Beck et al. Systematic review and evidence based recommendations
    on texture modified food and thickened liquids for adults
    (above 17 years) with oropharyngeal dysphagia – An updated
    clinical guideline. <i>Clinical Nutrition</i>, in press (2017).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Concludes that there is urgent need for more research, and
        that ‘one-size-fits-all’ thickening of liquids and/or
        texture-modifying foods is <i>not</i> recommended; regrets
        lack of robust evidence.</p>
</aside>
<p>Kim et al. Sensory and rheological characteristics of thickened
    liquids differing concentrations of a xanthan gum-based thickener.
    <i>Journal of Texture Studies</i> <strong>48</strong>, 571-585
    (2017).</p>
<aside>
    <p>An attempt to educate dietitians about food rheology. Authors
        also point out a serious shortcoming in many studies
        on properties of texture-modified foods / swallowing:
        studies are typically based on healthy volunteers and
        their swallowing experience (sometimes one wants to despair).</p>
</aside>
<p>A. Sasegbon and S. Hamdy. The anatomy and physiology of normal
    and abnormal swallowing in oropharyngeal dysphagia. <i>Neurogastroenterology &amp; Motility</i>    <strong>29</strong>:313100 (2017).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Accessible and concise overview, emphasis on neurological
        causes (most common).</p>
</aside>
<p>B. Talwar, R. Donnelly, R. Skelly and M. Donaldson. Nutritional
    management in head and neck cancer: United Kingdom National
    Multidisciplinary Guidelines. <i>The Journal of Laryngology and Otology</i>    <strong>130</strong>, S32-S40 (2016).</p>
<aside>
    <p>An attempt to summarise nutritional considerations for a
        group of patients with diverse special needs.</p>
</aside>
<p>J. Chandrashekar, M.A. Hoon, N.J.P. Ryba and C.S. Zuker. The
    receptors and cells for mammalian taste. <i>Nature</i>, <strong>444</strong>,
    288-294 (2006).</p>
<aside>
    <p>A clear and comprehensive review with up-to-date literature
        at the time; some aspects now slightly out of date.</p>
</aside>
<p>E.H.A. de Hoog, J.F. Prinz, L. Huntjens et al. Lubrication of
    oral surfaces by food emulsions: the importance of surface
    characteristics. <i>Journal of Food Science</i> 71, E337-E341
    (2006).</p>
<p>E. Silletti, M.H. Vingehoeds, G.A. van Aken and W. Norde. Rheological
    behavior of food emulsions mixed with saliva: Effect of oil
    content, salivary protein content, and saliva type. <i>Food Biophysics</i>    <strong>3</strong>, 318-328 (2008).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Highlights that resulting rheology depends on quantity and
        quality / composition of <i>all</i> components involved.</p>
</aside>
<p>R. Bansil and B.S. Turner. Mucin structure, aggregation, physiological
    functions and biomedical applications. <i>Current Opinion in Colloid &amp; Interface Science</i>    <strong>11</strong>, 164-170 (2006).</p>
<p>D. Saha and S. Bhattacharya. Hydrocolloids as thickening and
    gelling agents in food. <i>The Journal of Food Science and Technology</i>    <strong>47</strong>, 587-597 (2010).</p>
<p>H. This. Molecular Gastronomy, a Scientific Look at Cooking.
    <i>Accounts of Chemical Research</i> <strong>42</strong>,
    575-583 (2009).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Hervé This is one of the ‘fathers’ of the physics of food
        and the ensuing movement of what has become known as
        ‘molecular gastronomy’. Much of this research is extremely
        useful when thinking outside the box and trying to find
        pleasurable alternative food preparations for people
        with swallowing and general eating difficulties.</p>
</aside>
<p>T.A. Vilgis. Gels: model systems for soft matter food physics.
    <i>Current Opinion in Food Science</i> <strong>3</strong>,
    71-84 (2015).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Vilgis is another food-physics ‘activist’ who takes a scientific
        look the properties of food matter; this review gives
        an overview of gel properties, their measurement and
        consequences for their behaviour as edibles.</p>
</aside>
<p>T.A. Vilgis. Soft matter food physics – the physics of food and
    cooking. <i>Reports on Progress in Physics</i> <strong>78</strong>,
    124602 (82pp). doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/78/12/124602.</p>
<aside>
    <p>A well-written and accessible review of a pretty complicated
        but fascinating topic.</p>
</aside>
<p>P.W. Lucas et al. Food texture and its effect on ingestion, mastication
    and swallowing. <i>Journal of Texture Studies</i> <strong>35</strong>,
    159-170 (2004).</p>
<p>J.R. Stokes, M.W. Boehm and S.K. Baier. Oral processing, texture
    and mouthfeel: From rheology to tribology and beyond<i>. Current Opinion in Colloid &amp; Interface Science</i>    <strong>18</strong>, 349-359 (2013).</p>
<p>M. Hosotsubo et al. Fabrication of Artificial Food Bolus for
    Evaluation of Swallowing. <i>PloS One</i> <strong>11</strong>,
    e0168378 (2016).</p>
<p>P. Ravasco et al. Impact of Nutrition on Outcome: A Prospective
    Randomized Controlled Trial in Patients with Head and Neck
    Cancer Undergoing Radiotherapy. <i>Head &amp; Neck</i> <strong>27</strong>,
    659-668 (2005).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Highlights correlation between expert counselling and improved
        long-term outcomes; nutritional counselling is thought
        to be more effective than nutritional supplements.</p>
</aside>
<p>H. Ganzer et al. The eating experience after treatment for head
    and neack cancer: A review of the literature. <i>Oral Oncology</i>    <strong>51</strong>, 634-642 (2015).</p>
<aside>
    <p>No surprises in this review: head and neck cancers and their
        treatment have profound impact on eating &amp; drinking.</p>
</aside>
<p>A. Reynolds et al. Carbohydrate quality and human health: a series
    of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. <i>The Lancet</i>,
    in press (2019).</p>
<aside>
    <p>The study highlights, once again, the importance of insoluble
        polysaccharides / fibre in the human diet.</p>
</aside>
<h1 id="electronic-resources">Electronic resources</h1>
<p><a href="https://blog.khymos.org/">https://blog.khymos.org/</a></p>
<aside>
    <p>A private, non-commercial website by a scientist-foodie.
        Some interesting explanations about ‘molecular gastronomy’
        and the physical properties of food (gels and hydrocolloids
        in particular), and a recipe collection (downloadable
        pdf file) of unconventional foods – many of which are
        quite suitable for the various maxfac eating troubles.
        Worth a look, if only for inspiration.</p>
</aside>
<p><a href="https://www.bbc.com/food">https://www.bbc.com/food</a></p>
<aside>
    <p>The BBC maintains a vast (and free) collection of recipes,
        all well edited but not all particularly ‘inspired’,
        and some are really not that good. But there are gems
        in the collection, and there are some very clear ‘how
        to do such-and-such’ cooking videos on the website.</p>
</aside>
<p><a href="https://www.greatbritishchefs.com/">https://www.greatbritishchefs.com/</a></p>
<aside>
    <p>This is a commercial site, though free to use and with only
        modest amounts of foodie-targeted advertising. The website
        features some very good recipes, again some are slightly
        unconventional, and there are very well made, slick videos
        about some cooking techniques. The search engine on the
        website for ingredients and recipes is useful to navigate
        the site. A more recent addition is a sister website
        ‘Great Italian Chefs’.</p>
</aside>
