---
id: 59f34ca9580aec003cf43b54
uri: diagnosis/a-z/bone-lesion/detailed
title: Bone lesion
type: level3
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald & David A. Mitchell
order: 0
further_reading_uri: diagnosis/a-z/further-reading
updated_at: 2018-03-26T10:03:37Z
created_at: 2017-10-27T15:11:37Z
contents:
  - text: "Inflammatory and other non-neoplastic bone lesions"
    id: inflammatory-and-other-non-neoplastic-bone-lesions
  - text: "Malignant neoplastic bone lesions (bone cancers)"
    id: malignant-neoplastic-bone-lesions-bone-cancers
---

<p>This section provides additional information about some of the
    bone lesions mentioned previously. For most of these conditions,
    their aetiology as well as some new <a href="/treatment/surgery/bone-lesion">treatment ideas</a>    are the subject of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/further-reading">ongoing research</a>.</p>
<h1 id="inflammatory-and-other-non-neoplastic-bone-lesions">Inflammatory and other non-neoplastic bone lesions</h1>
<h2>Osteomyelitis</h2>
<p>The term osteomyelitis covers a bewildering range of acute and
    chronic inflammatory bone conditions, with a considerable
    degree of confusion about nomenclature in the literature.
    We will not try to resolve this issue but instead give descriptions
    of some of the acute and chronic forms of osteomyelitis without
    paying too much attention to giving the problem a name.</p>
<p><strong>Acute osteomyelitis</strong> usually follows on from
    some form of odontogenic infection and mostly affects the
    mandible. The mandible is more prone to this kind of infection
    than the maxilla because the vascularisation (supply with
    blood vessels) and blood supply in the maxilla is better
    than in the mandible.</p>
<p>The typical signs and symptoms are: pain, swelling, erythema
    (redness) of overlying skin and systemic upset. In suppurative
    (pus producing) osteomyelitis, sinus tracts (<a href="/diagnosis/a-z/fistula">‘tunnelling wounds’</a>)
    may develop. <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies">Paraesthesia</a>    (abnormal sensation or numbness) of local nerves may occur,
    a classic sign being numbness of the lower lip on the affected
    side of the mandible. Pathological fracture may occur and
    teeth become loose.</p>
<p>Infection persisting for more than one month is viewed as <strong>chronic osteomyelitis</strong>.
    There are a number of different types of the condition described,
    which can cause confusion. In broad terms these may be viewed
    as suppurative or non-suppurative. Chronic suppurative osteomyelitis
    is most commonly the result of inadequately treated acute
    osteomyelitis.</p>
<p><strong>Garré’s sclerosing osteomyelitis</strong> is an unusual
    condition, most often reported in children and young adults.
    Typically, there is a non-tender bony swelling of the mandible
    associated with a carious first molar. Systemic upset is
    unusual. It is thought that low grade chronic infection stimulates
    the active periosteum (connective tissue enveloping bone)
    to lay down bone (Garré’s sclerosing osteomyelitis is also
    referred to as periostitis ossificans). The subperiosteal
    bone deposition often has a laminated appearance and needs
    to be distinguished from malignancies such as <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/bone-lesion/more-info">osteosarcoma and Ewing’s sarcoma</a>.
    In the absence of an obvious dental cause, early <a href="/diagnosis/tests/biopsy">biopsy</a>    is required.</p>
<p><strong>Chronic sclerosing osteomyelitis</strong> is a poorly
    defined term. It may be focal or diffuse. It is thought to
    be an inflammatory response to low-grade bacterial infection
    in which there is bone deposition rather than resorption
    (although the exact mechanism for this is not fully understood).
    No specific infectious organism has been identified. Intermittent
    refractory pain is a feature. It is more frequent in the
    mandible. The symptoms include: pain, swelling, <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies">paraesthesia</a>,
    pressure and <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/trismus">trismus</a>.
    The symptoms may persist for years. Radiographs typically
    show mixed sclerosis and osteolysis, with the sclerotic component
    becoming more prominent over time. This is <strong>not</strong>    the same as medication related <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard/more-info">osteonecrosis of the jaws</a>.</p>
<p>Anecdotally there are an increasing number of atypical, acute
    or chronic episodes of unusual infections associated with
    these symptoms. No individual causative organism has been
    definitely identified but, amongst many, the most commonly
    mentioned bacterial strain is staphylococcus aureus; pseudomonas,
    actinomyces meyeri (a strictly <a href="/diagnosis/tests/microbiology">anaerobic bacterium</a>,
    and hence may be difficult to identify) and other actinomyces
    species (previously often assumed to only infect soft tissue),
    rhodococcus equi, mycobacteria (tuberculosis) and fungal
    spores (aspergillus) have all been mentioned. There is no
    obvious pattern regarding these bacterial infections, the
    only common pattern seems to be that nearly all implicated
    microorganisms are part of the normal <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">oral microflora</a>.</p>
<p>Osseointegrated <a href="/treatment/surgery/implants/getting-started">implants</a>    have become widely used in restorative dentistry in the recent
    past and more long-term results become available. Like on
    any other hard, smooth surface a specific kind of bacterial
    plaque, a biofilm, can form on implants and / or the attached
    crowns. Biofilms are difficult to eliminate and can be a
    source of persistent low-grade bacterial infection and give
    rise to osteomyelitis-like problems (<a href="/treatment/surgery/implants/getting-started">‘peri-implantitis’</a>)
    in the absence of meticulous <a href="/help/oral-hygiene">oral hygiene</a>.</p>
<p>There are multiple isolated cases where, despite clinical and
    radiographic evidence of abnormality such as localised or
    cyclical pain and sclerosis, there is no bacterial colonisation
    or active infection (sometimes referred to as non-bacterial
    or non-infectious osteomyelitis).</p>
<p>Recurrent diffuse, non-bacterial osteomyelitits of the mandible
    has been postulated as being one of the signs of SAPHO syndrome.
    SAPHO syndrome is a rare condition of unclear aetiology,
    thought to be an autoimmune condition possibly triggered
    by an initial inflammatory process. SAPHO (<i>s</i>ynovitis
    (inflammation of the membrane surrounding a joint), <i>a</i>cne,
    <i>p</i>ustulosis (recurrent pustules on palms and soles),
    <i>h</i>yperostosis (calcification of ligaments), osteitis
    (bone inflammation) syndrome may be diagnosed when some or
    all of these recurrent signs and symptoms can be identified.</p>
<h2>Fibrous dysplasia</h2>
<p>The cause(s) of fibrous dysplasia are not fully understood. It
    is thought that a spontaneous gene mutation (of gene GNAS1)
    at the early embryonal development stage is likely responsible,
    with some cells consequently carrying a copy of the defect
    gene and other cells carrying the normal gene. This explanation
    is consistent with clinical observation of a strong variability
    of symptoms of fibrous dysplasia, ranging from asymptomatic
    to severely disabling. GNAS1 is a gene that is involved,
    amongst others, in the regulation of endocrine activity (activity
    of glands that produce hormones). GNAS1 defects can lead
    to skin lesions and overactivity of endocrine glands, in
    addition to fibrous dysplasia (McCune-Albright syndrome).</p>
<p>Cherubism on the other hand, thought to be a hereditary variant
    of fibrous dysplasia, has been associated with a different,
    hereditary genetic mutation (affecting gene SH3 BP2; the
    mutation has been observed in the majority of people with
    cherubism but the mechanism of pathology is not yet understood).</p>
<p>Fibrous dysplasia can affect one (monostotic) or several (polyostotic)
    bones. When the skull and/or facial bones are affected, the
    bone deformities can lead to neurological symptoms (vision
    or hearing impairment) when cranial nerves in the vicinity
    are compressed. Distortion of facial features and other resulting
    symptoms vary greatly.</p>
<h2>Paget’s disease of the bone</h2>
<p>Paget’s disease of the bone (sometimes referred to as osteitis
    deformans) often only affects one or few bones, with the
    pelvis, hip, vertebrae in the lower spine and skull / facial
    bones most commonly affected. A number of different avenues
    have been explored to find the cause(s) of Paget’s disease
    of the bone but so far there is no conclusive answer. It
    is essentially not known what causes the specific imbalance
    of the bone remodelling process that gives rise to the condition.
    It is also not yet clarified if only the osteoclasts display
    abnormally high activity or if the osteoblasts also show
    abnormalities.</p>
<p>Some 30 to 40 years ago, several viral infections have been described
    as being associated with the occurrence of Paget’s disease
    of bone later in life. The suspects were mostly viruses from
    the <a href="/diagnosis/tests/microbiology">paramyxovirus group</a>,
    including measles, influenza, respiratory and canine distemper
    infections. All of these studies have been questioned; for
    example there is no single proven case of a human being infected
    with canine distemper disease. For the time being, a viral
    aetiology for Paget’s disease of the bone can be deemed highly
    unlikely.</p>
<p>An alternative hypothesis about the causes of Paget’s disease
    of the bone highlights a genetic predisposition: approximately
    half of people with a family history of Paget’s disease and
    10 percent of people with ‘spontaneous’ Paget’s disease carry
    mutations of a particular gene (SQSTM1); this gene is involved
    in the upregulation of (not yet fully understood mechanism
    of) osteoclast activation. Patterns of genetic mutations
    have also been identified for other, rare bone syndromes.
    The data does not yet make a definitive conclusion as to
    the aetiology of Pagets disease.</p>
<p>In part, this is due to yet another hypothesis: environmental
    factors and the results of epidemiology studies. Epidemiology
    reveals not only a well-known clustering of cases and geographic
    distribution (for example, in the UK Lancashire is a hot
    spot for Paget’s disease of the bone) but also shows that
    the number of cases has drastically fallen from 1974 (first
    census) to 1994 (second census). The prevalence in 1994 was
    roughly half that of 1974, and currently stands at affecting
    1 to 2 % of people older than 55 years in the UK; the prevalence
    increases with age.</p>
<p>A predominantly or exclusively genetic cause of Paget’s disease
    of the bone would be very difficult to explain with such
    a drastic reduction in the number of cases over a short period
    of only 20 years (in the UK and elsewhere). It would also
    be difficult to explain the reduced observed geographic variations.
    It makes more sense to see genetic patterns of mutations
    as an important predisposing factor, in tandem with additional
    environmental factors as trigger. Such environmental factors
    may include malnutrition in childhood (vitamin D deficiency
    and rickets), poor diet, pollutants (pesticides).</p>
<p>Clearly, more research is needed to identify the combined roles
    of genetics and environment in leading to Paget’s disease;
    understanding the reasons for the drastic reduction in cases
    over a short period of only 20 years may well hold key information
    for future rational treatment planning of the disease.</p>
<h1 id="malignant-neoplastic-bone-lesions-bone-cancers">Malignant neoplastic bone lesions (bone cancers)</h1>
<p>With primary bone malignancies being rare and thus only amounting
    to small numbers of cases (osteosarcoma affecting approximately
    1 in 100.000 people), there are nevertheless large numbers
    of publications dedicated to the condition and ‘big data’
    attempts have been made to understand the aetiology of osteosarcoma.
    Epidemiology and genomics combined have so far not really
    revealed much new insight. There seems to be a large variety
    of sub-types and variants of these malignant tumours (as
    well as strongly varied clinical behaviour and aggressiveness,
    including some variants related to very rare genetic disorders
    such as Li-Fraumeni syndrome) – one might be tempted to conclude
    that every osteosarcoma sufferer have their own and unique
    genetic tumour sub-type. We may just add to the speculations
    here, by contributing our own: perhaps the lack of discernible
    clear patterns will eventually lead to the conclusion that
    developing osteosarcoma may just be related to the statistics
    of a higher probability of error at periods of rapid cell
    proliferation and growth of bone?</p>
<p>The only robust information that can be taken from epidemiologic
    data concerns the peak of occurrence around puberty (at the
    time when there is a spurt of body growth, alongside massive
    hormonal changes), with a second smaller peak found for people
    older than 60 to 70 years. In older people, in most cases
    the occurrence of osteosarcoma is related to a history of
    long-standing bone disease and unbalance, such as in conjunction
    with Paget’s disease of the bone (see above; possibly this
    might be a hint that there may be common causes related to
    malfunctioning of the bone remodelling in Paget’s disease
    of the bone and osteosarcoma).</p>
<p>The only clearly identified external factor that can be considered
    as causative for osteosarcoma is previous exposure to high-energy
    radiation, such as received in <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>.
    In the past, Paget’s disease of the bone sometimes used to
    be treated by radiotherapy; this is obviously no longer considered
    an appropriate treatment. The long-term enhanced risk for
    developing osteosarcoma (or other secondary malignancies)
    following radiotherapy is a concern for the treatment options
    of young oral-cancer sufferers (in addition to an increased
    risk to develop <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis">osteoradionecrosis</a>).
    Previous radiotherapy to treat <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/blood-malignancy">Hodgkin lymphoma</a>    or brachytherapy for the treatment of ankylosing spondylitis
    (a chronic inflammatory conditon of the spine and other body
    parts) have been mentioned in the literature.</p>
<p>This brief summary of the state of insight with regard to the
    aetiology of osteosarcoma illustrates several other aspects
    and dilemmas of research into, and treatment of, rare diseases
    in general. Sometimes it can be attractive from a point of
    view of gaining general knowledge, beyond a specific condition,
    to conduct research into rare conditions. These are sometimes
    related to specific and identifiable genetic aberrations
    (hereditary as well as spontaneous mutations). But that knowledge
    does not directly lend itself to improved treatments, for
    a number of reasons. It would be completely unethical to
    insists that only large-scale clinical trials should be considered
    as adequate evidence support for treatment recommendations
    – it may literally take hundreds of years to collect enough
    data for rare conditions to have statistically meaningful
    data for analysis. Also, there is no incentive for private
    pharmaceutical industry to develop drugs for rare diseases
    – there is no money to be made from such endeavours. On the
    other hand, it may not always be beneficial to suffer from
    a less rare condition and end up being (over)treated in ways
    that often do not add to quality of life or improved survival
    rates but have been made available following pressure and
    lobbying, sometimes ill-informed. This topic has recently
    received increasing attention, from the professionals and
    patients.</p>
<p>So, for the time being much of the treatment of rare diseases
    (of which osteosarcoma and chondrosarcoma are just two examples;
    another, not yet completely understood aspect being that
    these solid bone malignancies are resistant to radiotherapy)
    has to rely on qualitative experience and anecdotal information.</p>
