---
id: 5ab8c5adb72988003171fea2
uri: treatment/surgery/implants
title: Craniofacial implants
type: directory
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-03-02T15:39:56Z
created_at: 2018-03-26T10:04:29Z
---

<p>When thinking or talking about implants, in most cases the tacit
    assumption will be that it is all about <a href="/treatment/restorative-dentistry">restorative dentistry</a>    and dental implants. However, the term ‘implant’ is much
    broader than that particular application; it refers to any
    kind of support (literally) for <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">prostheses</a>    of all kinds.</p>
<p>An implant is a device that is anchored into bone (osseointegrated)
    to provide strong and durable support for whatever will be
    attached to it. The typical construction consists of a small
    but strong screw (to connect to the supporting bone) with
    a head that connects to some intermediate construction that
    provides the connection and link to the (external) prosthesis.
    Depending on the kind of prosthesis, the prosthesis may be
    fixed and permanently connected (common for dental crowns,
    for example) or may be detachable (common for many other
    prostheses, for example an artificial ear).</p>
<p>Given the fundamental role of bony structures to carry and support
    implants and prostheses, an important and common part of
    this kind of reconstructive work is the surgical preparation
    (or initial repair and/or augmentation) of the bone(s) that
    will serve as the structural support for implants and prostheses
    and the surrounding soft tissues.</p>
<p>The aspect of surgery derives from older techniques which pre-dated
    successful implantology and was known as pre-prosthetic surgery.
    It can be used alone, in some instances, to prepare the denture
    fitting areas of the jaws for conventional prosthesis or
    as an adjunct to dental or sometimes craniofacial implants.</p>
