---
id: 5b02eeec8bd8cd0029f43aa2
uri: treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/calcitonin
title: Calcitonin
type: page
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-11-09T15:17:58Z
created_at: 2018-05-21T16:08:12Z
---

<p>Calcitonin is a hormone that is synthesized in some specialised
    cells of the thyroid gland. Calcitonin is involved in the
    <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard/detailed">bone remodelling process</a>    by its role in regulating the blood levels of Ca<sup>2+</sup>    ions. In this role, calcitonin acts as the counterplayer
    to <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/pth">parathyroid hormone, PTH</a>.
    PTH secretion is increased whenever the blood concentration
    of Ca<sup>2+</sup> ions is low or falling, and then PTH activates
    the osteoclasts (cells responsible for breaking down old
    bone tissue in the bone renewal process). This increased
    osteoclast activity increases the Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentration
    in blood by increased breaking down of bone tissue.</p>
<p>Calcitonin has the opposite action trigger and effects. Its secretion
    is increased by high or increasing Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentration
    in the blood serum. Another activating factor for increased
    release of calcitonin stems from gastrointestinal hormones
    such as gastrin. An increased calcitonin concentration mainly
    inhibits / reduces the activity of osteoclasts in the resorption
    phase of the <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard/detailed">bone remodelling</a>,
    it is thought to have some general effects on osteocytes
    (common type of cells in mature bone tissue) as well, and
    also enables increased excretion of Ca<sup>2+</sup> (and
    phosphate) ions in the urine. The main physiological role
    of calcitonin may thus be summarised as protecting against
    excessive bone loss from overactive Ca<sup>2+</sup> mobilisation.
    Calcitonin is also known to stimulate vitamin D production
    in the kidneys. Many of the more subtle aspects of the effects,
    interactions and roles of calcitonin remain to be clarified.
    Abnormally high calcitonin levels may indicate some thyroid
    gland diseases, including malignancies affecting the thyroid
    cells that produce calcitonin, kidney failure and a range
    of disorders of the digestive system. One such syndrome produces
    neuromas (small nerve growths) in the lining of the mouth.</p>
<p>Calcitonin has a role as medication in the treatment of hypercalcaemia
    (abnormally high Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentrations in blood
    serum) and a number of bone disorders, including <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/bone-lesion/more-info">Paget’s disease</a>,
    osteoporosis after menopause (although the use for this condition
    is nowadays rare, with <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/bisphosphonates">bisphosphonates</a>    and <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/denusomab">denusomab</a>    nowadays much more widely prescribed <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/antiresorptive">antiresorptive agents</a>),
    bone pain from <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">bone metastases</a>.
    Calcitonin has been mentioned in the literature as a medication
    for the treatment of some forms <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/bone-lesion/more-info">chronic osteomyelitis</a>    but the evidence is unconvincing.</p>
<p>Calcitonin for use as medication is isolated from salmon. Calcitonin
    needs to be <a href="/treatment/other/medication/delivery/more-info">given by injection</a>    into a muscle or under the skin. Calcitonin is a polypetide
    molecule (a chain of nucleic acid building blocks) that,
    if taken orally, would be made ineffective because it would
    be chemically broken down in the acidic stomach environment.
     </p>
