---
id: 5b784bf52e28ec001bcfe9e9
uri: treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/pth
title: Parathyroid hormone
type: page
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2018-11-11T15:14:25Z
created_at: 2018-08-18T16:40:21Z
---

<p>Parathyroid hormone, PTH, is produced by the parathyroid glands
    (four small glands in the neck, behind the thyroid gland).
    It plays a crucial role in <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard/detailed">bone remodelling process</a>,
    the continuous process of bone tissue renewal throughout
    life. Underactive (hypoparathyroidism) or overactive (hyperparathyroidism)
    levels of PTH thus cause bone diseases, and other problems
    from too high (hypercalcaemia) or too low (hypocalcaemia)
    concentrations of Ca<sup>2+</sup> ions in the blood. Such
    problems include damage to the kidneys or mineral deposits
    in the lens of the eye.</p>
<p>PTH is secreted whenever the blood serum levels of Ca<sup>2+</sup>    ions are low or falling, it activates the osteoclasts (cells
    responsible for breaking down old bone tissue in the renewal
    process), leading to a release of Ca<sup>2+</sup> ions from
    bone into the blood to normalise the amount of calcium ions
    in circulation. The maintenance of stable Ca<sup>2+</sup>    concentrations in blood serum, is regulated by multiple feedback
    and control cycles. PTH has a counter-player hormone,
    <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/calcitonin">calcitonin</a> that is secreted by the thyroid gland whenever
        the Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels in the blood are too high
        or rising and which inhibits the mobilisation of Ca<sup>2+</sup>        by bone resorption. Maintaining equilibrium Ca<sup>2+</sup>        levels in the blood is a delicate balancing act as the
        amount of calcium ions in ‘store’ in bone is approximately
        3,000 times more than the amount of calcium ions dissolved
        in blood. In addition, the mobilised amount of calcium
        ions in circulation not only depends on the interplay
        of PTH and calcitonin but also on external factors such
        as variations in <a href="/help/oral-food/nutrition">nutrition</a>        and metabolism, as well as stress (PTH secretion is triggered
        by <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/adrenaline">adrenaline</a>        and <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/histamine">histamine</a>)
        and sleep patterns. In addition to the regulation of
        Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentrations, PTH is also an active
        part of the body’s phosphate metabolism and activates
        the promotion of pro-vitamin D to its active form, vitamin
        D (in the kidneys).</p>
<p>The serum concentration of PTH can be determined by a range of
    <a href="/diagnosis/tests/blood-tests">blood tests</a>; it
    needs to be in a fairly narrow concentration range to ensure
    normal physiological function.</p>
<p>Excessive amounts of PTH in the blood (<strong>hyperparathyroidism</strong>)
    can be caused by overactivity of the parathyroid glands,
    or by abnormally low Ca<sup>2+</sup> blood concentrations
    (hypocalcaemia) from other causes. Hyperparathyroidism is
    normally treated by surgical removal of most of the overactive
    gland tissue, sometimes supported by medication (such as
    calcimimetics - drugs that mimic calcium ions in blood) or
    oestrogen hormone replacement therapy in post-menopausal
    women; <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/bisphosphonates">bisphosphonates</a>    also reduce the loss of Ca<sup>2+</sup> ions from osteoporosis
    caused by hyperparathyroidism. All these medications have
    potentially serious risks for long-term use and do not address
    any underlying problem of the parathyroid glands.</p>
<p>Insufficient amounts, or complete lack, of PTH in blood serum
    (<strong>hypoparathyroidism</strong>) are most commonly caused
    by damage to, or removal of, the parathyroid glands in thyroid
    surgery. The traditional treatment for hypoparathyroidism
    was to use calcium and vitamin D supplements to normalise
    blood serum levels. This therapy did not restore the normal
    regulation and maintenance of Ca<sup>2+</sup> (and phosphate)
    metabolism. It affected the quality of life and increased
    the risk for the development of a number of comorbidities.
    Nowadays, PTH replacement therapy is used, most commonly
    by daily injections of a very close analogue of human PTH.</p>
