---
id: 5b7848242e28ec001bcfe9bd
uri: treatment/other/miscellaneous/acupuncture
title: Acupuncture
type: page
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-12-15T11:38:06Z
created_at: 2018-08-18T16:24:04Z
---

<p>Acupuncture is a popular alternative medicine approach
    with origins in Chinese medicine. It is mainly used for
    treatment of a variety of pain and pain syndromes.
    Acupuncture involves the placement of fine needles in
    strategic positions. The working principles of
    acupuncture remain shrouded in mystery but it has been
    pointed out that there are some vague similarities with
    transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, <a href="/treatment/other/miscellaneous/tens">TENS</a>.
    TENS is assumed (not proven) to work by exerting
    stimulus to peripheral nerves by applying small currents
    <i>via</i> electrodes through the skin. It is thought
    that acupuncture may achieve similar nerve stimulation
    effects by piercing the skin with fine needles.</p>
<p>There is a large body of literature on acupuncture and it
    is highly controversial if acupuncture has any clinical
    benefits beyond a placebo effect (some have branded
    acupuncture as ‘theatrical placebo’). The debate depends
    on a large number of poor-quality studies that do not
    provide any reliable evidence. Further there is nothing
    close to agreement as to how clinical effects of
    acupuncture should be assessed and validated.</p>
<p>Some studies employ sham needling and compare the
    outcomes in trial-like manner to the outcomes for
    standard acupuncture treatments. The majority of these
    studies do not demonstrate any effect of acupuncture
    that would be significantly different from / better than
    that of the sham procedures. Critics take this as strong
    evidence to dismiss any benefits of acupuncture. Only
    small observational studies without comparison with sham
    needle procedures report better outcomes than other (or
    no) treatment. Perhaps the only significant and reliable
    piece of information in the debate about acupuncture
    actually is this difference in reported results.</p>
<p>Those in favour of acupuncture question the merits of
    comparing sham and real procedures, claiming that
    acupuncture cannot be assessed in this way (a
    questionable argument), given that such acupuncture
    assessment schemes still amount to essentially comparing
    ‘apples and pears’. Those in favour of acupuncture take
    <a href="/diagnosis/tests/mri/detailed">fMRI</a> effects
    observed after needle placement as evidence that
    acupuncture works – but forget to mention that sham
    needling and/or other placebo experiments also produce
    measurable fMRI effects. Some of those in favour of
    acupuncture take a pragmatic view and promote it as a
    relatively safe, though only moderately effective
    intervention. In short, the whole debate lacks rigour
    and depth, and there is no robust and convincing
    evidence that acupuncture is clinically effective
    because of the mediocre quality of publications on this
    topic.</p>
<p>Regarding maxillofacial pain syndromes, acupuncture
    applications mainly in the management of <a href="/diagnosis-list-jaw-joint-lvel1">temporomandibular
        (jaw) joint disorders</a>, myofascial (muscle)
    facial pain and spasms and several other <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/facial-pain-syndrome">facial
        pain syndromes</a> have been reported, including
    migraines and other headaches and anxiety in dental
    patients.</p>
<p>So, what should one conclude at this point? If somebody
    believes that acupuncture helps them, perhaps they
    should use it – keeping in mind that there may be other,
    free of cost, ways to achieve similar results, by
    placebo effects or otherwise. When deciding for or
    against acupuncture it may be a good idea to remember
    that although acupuncture is nearly always portrayed as
    harmless, it does carry some small risks for minor and
    serious adverse effects including injuries, bleeding,
    fainting and infections.</p>
