---
id: 5b783b912e28ec001bcfe854
uri: treatment/surgery/postoperative-problems/skull
title: Skull
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
further_reading_uri: treatment/surgery/further-reading
updated_at: 2018-11-09T13:21:32Z
created_at: 2018-08-18T15:30:25Z
---

<p>Treatments for postoperative problems affecting the skull include:</p>
<ul>
    <li>Defects in the skull bone. <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">Reconstruction</a>        can be carried out either when the defect is created
        or much later depending on the circumstances causing
        the defect. Generally, in a maxillofacial-only operation
        only the outer table of skull bone will be removed and
        this is often either replaced with synthetic tissue such
        as <a href="/treatment/other/miscellaneous/platelet-plasma">platelet reduced plasma</a>        or fibrin, or it fills in naturally. Sometimes protecting
        and creating a new outer skull shape is achieved by a
        layer using titanium mesh, PEEK (a polyether ketone polymer),
        acrylic, resorbable mesh made from polydioxanone, and
        similar. If full-thickness skull has been removed and
        is healthy it can be re-used as a shaped and fixed
        <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">bone graft</a>. Complex late skull reconstructions are
            often carried out using <a href="/diagnosis/tests/maths/3d-image">CAD/CAM technology</a>.</li>
    <li>Scars. In male pattern baldness the coronal scar (a scar
        across the top of the head; common approach in <a href="/treatment/surgery/fracture">trauma surgery</a>)
        becomes visible but incisions are hidden in hairlines
        whenever possible. Scar revision involves excising the
        old scar and closing it primarily, various patterns to
        break up the straight line (to which the eye is naturally
        attracted) can be used.</li>
    <li>Headache for a day or two is not unusual. Simple <a href="/treatment/other/medication/pain">analgesia</a>        and advice that it will improve is all that is needed.
        Accumulation of blood under the incision not resolved
        by a drain may require removal.</li>
</ul>
