---
id: 5be58548b2a04b001e646875
uri: treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/vasopressor
title: Vasoconstrictor & vasodilation medications
type: page
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald and David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-07-13T11:05:34Z
created_at: 2018-11-09T13:02:00Z
---

<p>Vasoconstriction (constriction of blood vessels) and vasodilation
    (dilation of blood vessels) are normal body functions. Maintenance
    of a balance of the two counteracting processes and immediate
    reaction to acute needs are an important aspect of keeping
    a body alive. Flexible and rapid regulation of the two counteracting
    effects is necessary to provide tissues with nutrition and
    oxygen according to need, to enable regular and uninterrupted
    blood flow in general (<a href="/treatment/other/bleeding/more-info">homeostasis</a>),
    as an emergency response to injury, and to maintain body
    temperature in warm-blooded animals including humans.</p>
<p>Balance of vasoconstriction and vasodilation is mediated by a
    number of different metabolic control cycles. The effect
    on blood vessels is achieved by action on the smooth muscles
    that form part of the <a href="/treatment/other/bleeding/more-info">walls of blood vessels</a>    which constrict or dilate, according to chemical signals
    from messenger molecules. The main neurotransmitters (messenger
    molecules) involved in the vasoconstriction process are
    <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/adrenaline">adrenaline and noradrenaline</a>, angiotensin and vasopressin.
        The central nervous system (brain and spinal cord), the
        sympathetic and parasympathetic, involuntary nervous
        systems are all part of the processes.</p>
<p><strong>Vasodilators</strong> are substances that widen the blood
    vessels, either by direct action on the smooth muscles in
    the walls of the blood vessels, or by interacting with regulating
    (vasomotor) centres in the brain. Vasodilator drugs are powerful
    agents to reduce blood pressure. Vasodilators acting directly
    on the smooth muscles of the cell walls (hydralazine, minoxidil)
    have serious adverse effects, so their clinical use is limited
    to emergency interventions to treat otherwise resistant very
    high blood pressure, or high blood pressure in the presence
    of kidney failure. Many foods contain components with mild
    vasodilation effects, for example theobromine in chocolate
    or <a href="/diagnosis/drugs/alcohol">alcohol</a>.</p>
<p><strong>Vasoconstrictors</strong>, also known as vasopressors,
    are agents that cause constriction of blood vessels and raise
    blood pressure in this way. The raising of blood pressure
    can be achieved by direct action of an agent on the smooth
    muscles in the walls of the blood vessels or by interacting
    with various regulating mechanisms in the nervous system.
    Many foods contain components with mild vasoconstriction
    effects, for example <a href="/diagnosis/drugs/overview">caffeine</a>    or <a href="/diagnosis/drugs/tobacco">nicotine</a>.
    Vasoconstrictor medications include agonists of vasopressin,
    agonists of the alpha-adrenoceptor (the receptor for adrenaline),
    <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/adrenaline">adrenaline and noradrenaline</a>,
    dopamine, dobutamine, phenylephrine.</p>
<p>In the context of maxillofacial surgery, vasoconstricting agents
    have various uses. Vasoconstriction is a means of stopping
    bleeding, for example a nose bleed or similar. Triptans are
    a particular type of medication for the treatment of migraines,
    one aspect of their specific working mechanism is their ability
    to trigger vasoconstriction. Vasodilating agents, including
    papaverine (an alkaloid isolated from opium), <a href="/treatment/other/medication/pain/detailed">lidocaine</a>    and verapamil (a calcium channel blocker, otherwise used
    in the treatment of high blood pressure) are used in microvascular
    surgery to overcome spasms of the smooth muscles of the walls
    of blood vessels.</p>
<p>An important reason for maxillofacial surgery (and other disciplines)
    intervention is in the treatment of shock, the body’s emergency
    reaction to a variety of causes. Generally, the most common
    cause for shock is <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection/detailed">sepsis</a>,
    other causes are severe blood loss in <a href="/treatment/surgery/fracture/more-info">trauma</a>,
    severe loss of other fluids (for example dehydration of large
    burn wounds), <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection/more-info">bacterial infections</a>,
    severe <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">allergic reactions</a>    (anaphylactic shock) and other out-of-control <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">inflammatory conditions</a>,
    nerve damage (in particular central nervous system injuries),
    effects of drugs and toxins, malfunction of the endocrine
    system (for example, hypothyroidism), extremely low blood
    sugar levels (hypoglycaemia). Haemorrhagic shock as a result
    of trauma and severe blood loss is the most common form of
    shock encountered in maxillofacial surgery; the common
    <a href="/treatment/surgery/fracture/more-info">emergency interventions</a> (application of pressure, surgical
        ligation, reduction and fixation of fractures) include
        the use of <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/adrenaline">adrenaline</a>        as a locally applied vasoconstrictor (and often as part
        of a <a href="/treatment/other/medication/pain/detailed">local analgesic</a>)
        and/or the use of <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/tranexamic">tranexamic acid</a>        to help stop excessive bleeding. This, in turn, will
        re-establish oxygen delivery to tissues by re-establishing
        and stabilising regular blood flow (and blood pressure).</p>
