---
id: 5be5a3b4b2a04b001e6468a8
uri: treatment/timelines/palliative-care/getting-started
title: Palliative & end of life care
type: level1
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald and David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-03-02T14:10:44Z
created_at: 2018-11-09T15:11:48Z
---

<p>Palliative treatment is an important treatment modality as, for
    example, not all cancer will be curable. A tumour may be
    impossible to resect, there may be distant <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/metastases">metastases</a>    present, somebody may not be fit for active treatment, there
    may be untreatable tumour recurrence, or somebody may decide
    to decline further aggressive treatment.</p>
<p>The aims of palliative treatment are to maintain quality of life
    as well as possible. Palliative treatment is not necessarily
    just a short-term treatment at the end of life (as many incurable
    conditions, with appropriate care and treatment, can be lived
    with for considerable periods of time) but will include end-of-life
    care. Palliative treatment aims to alleviate any suffering.
    Typically, this includes optimal <a href="/treatment/other/medication/pain">pain control</a>,
    as well as emotional, social and spiritual support.</p>
<p>These care needs (and expectations) will vary strongly from person
    to person, a personalized approach is therefore important.
    Palliative treatment of malignancies can be viewed as ‘active’
    where an intervention, usually <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy">chemotherapy</a>    (in some cases up to six lines of chemotherapy are tried),
    <a href="/treatment/other/new-developments/immunotherapies">immunotherapy</a>,
    or very limited <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>    (for example, localised low-dose radiotherapy to spinal metastases
    to relieve both <a href="/treatment/other/medication/pain/more-info">pain</a>    and spinal cord compression) are used, or as ‘best supportive
    care’ where no active intervention is used.</p>
<p>The approach is similar to treatment with curative intent, in
    being team based, with good communication between all involved.
    The concept of palliative care at the end of life is most
    commonly associated with the terminal stage of malignant
    diseases, at least in the context of oral and maxillofacial
    conditions. However, other common terminal conditions such
    as heart, kidney or liver failure, as well as various degenerative
    conditions, carry a similar disease and symptom burden toward
    the end of life. Hospital or hospice based expertise from
    palliative care teams, pain management teams and the caring
    environment of hospices can make an invaluable contribution
    to the quality of the end of somebody’s life.</p>
