---
id: 5c7aaad913b81a001d83c581
uri: treatment/restorative-dentistry/periodontal/detailed
title: Periodontal disease
type: level3
authorship: Authored by Bethany Rushworth;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
further_reading_uri: treatment/restorative-dentistry/further-reading
updated_at: 2019-07-13T09:50:21Z
created_at: 2019-03-02T16:10:01Z
---

<p>In dealing with a specialty subject that involves the mouth,
    jaws and face it is obvious that aspects of pathology and
    treatment of the teeth that interlink or provide context
    with oral and maxillofacial surgery is required. This is
    the point of the entire section on restorative dentistry
    where another specialist subject is very briefly touched
    upon to give context and some detail in relevant subsections;
    periodontal disease being one such condition.</p>
<p>Whilst gingivitis is inflammation of the gingival tissues around
    teeth, periodontitis is inflammation of the periodontium
    including the periodontal ligament and alveolar bone. Often,
    gingivitis is considered to be the reversible phase of periodontal
    disease characterised by bleeding gingivae, redness and swelling,
    often associated with poor <a href="/help/oral-hygiene">oral hygiene</a>.
    Pain is not usually a symptom. Probing depths exceeding 3
    mm may be present due to false pocketing.  Periodontitis
    is not reversible, and alongside the symptoms of gingivitis,
    there may also be gingival recession, pain and halitosis.
    Teeth may become mobile or lost due to damage to the surrounding
    bone, periodontal ligament and gingivae.</p>
<p>The presence of a plaque biofilm leads to the host initiating
    an <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/more-info">inflammatory response</a>    within the gingival tissues. Whilst this response is intended
    to be protective, ‘bystander damage’ can also result in damage
    to the local tissues. The bacterial biofilm composition throughout
    the mouth is varied depending on the site. Biofilms on the
    teeth for example in the occlusal fissures are mainly
    <a href="/diagnosis/tests/microbiology">Gram-positive facultative anaerobes</a>, whereas those in
        periodontal pockets are mainly <a href="/diagnosis/tests/microbiology">obligate anaerobic Gram-negative rods and cocci</a>.</p>
<p>Whilst the current classification for periodontal diseases used
    was introduced in 1999, in 2018 a new global classification
    system for periodontal health, diseases and conditions was
    announced. The new classification for periodontitis includes
    stages I to IV (from initial to severe periodontitis with
    potential for loss of the dentition) and grades A to C (from
    slow to rapid rate of progression), alongside extent and
    distribution of disease (localised, generalised, molar-incisor
    distribution).</p>
<p>The management and treatment of periodontal disease requires
    a significant effort by patients at home. Any risk factors,
    such as diabetes and <a href="/diagnosis/drugs/tobacco">smoking</a>,
    need to be identified. A plaque-free score, marginal bleeding
    and basic periodontal examination should be recorded at the
    examination stage. This allows for assessment of plaque control
    and inflammation and acts as a guide as to what further investigations
    or treatment may be required.</p>
<p>The most recent British Society of Periodontology guidelines
    (2016) stipulate that the appropriate way to record a basic
    periodontal examination is through division of the dentition
    into six sextants and the highest score for each sextant
    recorded. Third molars are not included unless 1<sup>st</sup>    and/or 2<sup>nd</sup> molars are absent. If a sextant contains
    one or no teeth, it does not qualify for recording. The WHO
    basic periodontal examination probe with a ball end of 0.5
    mm diameter and a black band from3.5 mm to 5.5 mm is recommended,
    alongside a 20 to 25 g light probing force.</p>
<p>The guidelines for the scoring codes and recommended actions
    are summarised in Table 1.</p>
<h2>Table 1 Scoring codes, findings and recommended actions in basic
    periodontal examination</h2>
<table>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th> Score</th>
            <th> Observations</th>
            <th> Recommended actions</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> 0</td>
            <td> Pockets &lt; 3.5mm, no calculus/overhangs, no bleeding
                on probing (black band entirely visible)</td>
            <td>
            No need for periodontal treatment</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> 1</td>
            <td> Pockets &lt;3.5mm, no calculus/overhangs, bleeding
                on probing (black band entirely visible)</td>
            <td>
            Oral hygiene instructions</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> 2</td>
            <td> Pockets &lt;3.5mm, supra or subgingival calculus/overhangs
                (black band entirely visible)</td>
            <td> As for code 1, plus removal of plaque-retentive factors,
                including all supra- and subgingival calculus</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> 3</td>
            <td> Probing depth 3.5-5.5mm (black band partially visible,
                indicating pocket of 4-5mm)</td>
            <td> As for code 2, and root surface debridement if required</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> 4</td>
            <td> Probing depth &gt;5,5mm (black band disappears, indicating
                pocket of 6mm or more)</td>
            <td> Oral hygiene instructions, root surface debridement,
                assessment of need for more complex treatment</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> *</td>
            <td> Furcation involvement</td>
            <td> Treatment according to codes 0 to 4, assessment of
                need for more complex treatment</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<p>All new patients should have the basic periodontal examination
    recorded, however the basic periodontal examination should
    not be used around implants (4 or 6-point pocket charting
    is advised).</p>
<p><a href="/diagnosis/tests/x-ray">X-ray radiographs</a> may be
    used to support a clinical diagnosis and to monitor bone
    loss.</p>
<p>If a periodontic and endodontic lesions coalesce, this is known
    as a periodontic-endodontic (perio-endo) lesion. In these
    cases, the acute infection must be managed through drainage
    (systemic <a href="/treatment/other/medication/infection/more-info">antibacterial agents</a>    may be required) and following this, <a href="/treatment/restorative-dentistry/endodontics">root canal treatment</a>    can be initiated.</p>
<p><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection/more-info">Necrotising periodontal diseases</a>    are painful and destructive with ulcerated necrotic papillae
    (‘punched out appearance’). Aggressive periodontitis is rare,
    however it may be rapidly progressive with no obvious risk
    factors. It tends to occur in families and an early age of
    onset. The amount of plaque present is usually disproportionate
    to the severity of periodontal destruction. Aggressive periodontitis
    is often associated with the bacterial pathogens <i>aggregatibacter actinomycetamcomitans</i>    and <i>porphyromonas gingivalis</i>. There are two main forms,
    generalised and localised aggressive periodontitis. Treatment
    is through sub- and supragingival plaque control and regular
    supportive care. In some cases, adjunctive <a href="/treatment/other/medication/infection/detailed">systemic antibiotics</a>    and surgery is indicated.</p>
<p>If pus collects in the tissues adjacent to a periodontal pocket,
    this is known as a <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/abscess">periodontal abscess</a>.
    These commonly occur in furcations. As the tooth may be tender
    to percussion and painful, it is important not to misdiagnose
    this as periapical periodontitis. The tooth will usually
    be vital and mobile and lateral movements will elicit pain.
    Incision and drainage <a href="/treatment/surgery/anaesthesia">under local anaesthesia</a>    is recommended and a 5 day course of systemic antibiotics.
    After emergency management of the acute infection, mechanical
    débridement is necessary and conventional treatment of the
    existing periodontal pocket.</p>
