---
id: 5c7ab1e413b81a001d83c5e1
uri: treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/immunosuppressants
title: Immunosuppressants
type: page
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald;Proof-read/edited by David A. Mitchell
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-12-13T14:15:15Z
created_at: 2019-03-02T16:40:04Z
contents:
  - text: "‘Traditional agents’, corticosteroids"
    id: traditional-agents-corticosteroids
  - text: "‘Steroid-sparing agents’"
    id: steroid-sparing-agents
  - text: "‘Biologics’"
    id: biologics
  - text: "Outlook"
    id: outlook
---

<p>Immunomodulating drugs include <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">immunostimulating
        agents</a> and immunosuppressants. The term
    immunosuppressant covers a range of agents that
    interfere with the body’s <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/more-info">immune
        system</a> in different ways such that the immune
    response of the body is reduced to some degree, or even
    blocked. The most prominent conditions in need of
    immunosuppressant medications are autoimmune disorders
    and hypersensitivities (allergies), and the need to
    suppress organ rejection after allotransplantation of
    tissues or organs (transplantation from a genetically
    non-identical donor). A more recent addition of
    conditions treated with immunosuppressants are those due
    to adverse effects of <a href="/treatment/other/new-developments/immunotherapies/detailed">immunotherapies</a>,
    immune-related adverse effects (IREAs) in these
    treatments of some malignancies.</p>
<p>Immunosuppressants can be roughly divided into
    sub-categories, and can be further classified according
    to their mode(s) and mechanism(s) of action:</p>
<ul>
    <li>‘traditional agents’ - <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">corticosteroids</a>,
        with <a href="/treatment/other/medication/delivery">topical
            and systemic applications</a>;</li>
    <li>‘steroid-sparing agents’ – a range of different
        agents that may, in some cases, help to reduce or
        avoid the use of systemic corticosteroids, including
        calcineurin inhibitors, alkylating agents or
        antimetabolites;</li>
    <li>‘biologics’ – a range of agents, usually derived
        from biological materials, including a number of
        hormones and growth factors, monoclonal antibodies
        or modified proteins (‘fusion proteins’).</li>
</ul>
<p>When used systemically, all immunosuppressants carry a
    high burden of adverse effects and increased risk of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/infection">infections</a>.
    This is not surprising, given the central role of the <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/more-info">innate
        and adaptive immune system</a> as the general
    body-defence system against infections of all kinds and
    other harmful effects. This is not a great consolation
    when there is little choice but to use such medications;
    the use of such medications does require a very careful,
    individual risk / benefit analysis and ongoing
    monitoring.</p>
<p>Allotransplantation in the past has not been an issue in
    oral and maxillofacial surgery, but face transplants
    more recently have added this theme to maxillofacial
    surgery, including all concomitant aspects of systemic
    immunosuppression. Autoimmune conditions (as many of
    these have oral and/or skin / facial manifestations; see
    below) and other inflammatory conditions have been and
    remain an issue in maxillofacial surgery. Fortunately,
    for several of these conditions <a href="/treatment/other/medication/delivery">topical
        drug delivery</a> is a viable option, avoiding some
    or all of the adverse effects of systemic use of
    immunosuppressants (see below).</p>
<p>For many relevant oral and maxillofacial conditions,
    corticosteroids remain the first-line medications.
    Intra-lesion injection of corticosteroids into any
    condition which can be localised is the general
    preference for delivery.</p>
<h1 id="traditional-agents-corticosteroids">‘Traditional agents’, corticosteroids</h1>
<p>A number of different <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">corticosteroids</a>
    suppress the release of various different
    pro-inflammatory signalling molecules of a large number
    of different cell types, including the release of <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/prostaglandins">prostaglandins</a>.
    The anti-inflammatory effect of corticosteroids largely
    results from their silencing of the genetic pathways
    that regulate multiple inflammatory responses. The
    adverse effects of long-term systemic use of
    corticosteroids include ulcers and bleeds of the
    gastrointestinal tract, hypertension (high blood
    pressure) and other cardiovascular diseases, increased
    risk of <a href="/diagnosis-list-infections-level1">infections</a>,
    myopathies (conditions affecting muscle fibres),
    osteoporosis (brittle bones), Cushingoid facies (moon
    face), cataract and glaucoma.</p>
<p>There are a number of oral and maxillofacial conditions
    where topical and/or systemic corticosteroids are used
    for short- and/or long-term treatments, including</p>
<ul>
    <li>many/most <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/oral-mucosal-lesion/detailed">oral
            mucosal lesions</a> and mouth ulcers, including
        oral manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus,
        some forms of oral lichen planus, mucositis;</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/vascular-abnormalities">vascular
            abnormalities</a> ;</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/benign-lump">granuloma
            and orofacial granulomatosis</a> ;</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/jaw-joint">disorders
            of the temporomandibular (jaw) joint</a> ;</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/salivary-gland-problems/detailed">conditions
            affecting the salivary glands</a> , such as <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/xerostomia">Sjögren’s
            syndrome</a>, ranulas or mucoceles, and
        sialadenitis (inflammation of a salivary gland);
    </li>
    <li>sometimes used in surgery for the <a href="/treatment/surgery/ectopic-teeth/detailed">removal
            of impacted third molars</a> (wisdom teeth).
    </li>
    <li>severe recurrent oral ulceration.</li>
</ul>
<h1 id="steroid-sparing-agents">‘Steroid-sparing agents’</h1>
<p>The main types of agents that can help to reduce the dose
    of systemic corticosteroids when used in combination, or
    used as a second-line treatment option when
    corticosteroids do not work, are</p>
<ul>
    <li>calcineurin inhibitors;</li>
    <li>alkylating agents;</li>
    <li>antimetabolites.</li>
</ul>
<p>These drugs all come with adverse effects of their own
    (see below).</p>
<p><strong>Calcineurin inhibitors</strong> prevent the
    production of interleukin (a type of signalling protein
    involved in the regulation of the immune response) in <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/more-info">T
        cells</a> (a type of white blood cell). This results
    in a much diminished overall immune reaction. Examples
    of calcineurin inhibitors are cyclosporine, tacrolimus
    and sirolimus). The working mechanism of cyclosporine is
    similar to that of tacrolimus but the two distinct drugs
    bind to different target proteins. The immunosuppressive
    effect of tacrolimus is much greater than that of
    cyclosporine, and so are the number and severity of its
    adverse effects. Adverse effects of calcineurin
    inhibitors include hypertension, kidney and liver
    toxicity (a major problem as these agents are used to
    suppress donor-organ rejection after kidney or liver
    transplants), gastrointestinal disorders, unbalanced
    electrolytes and glucose levels, skin reactions and
    hirsutism (in women, growing a beard) and increased
    levels of white blood cells.</p>
<p><strong>Alkylating agents</strong> (mainly chlorambucil
    and cyclophosphamide) are cytotoxic agents that
    chemically interfere with the synthesis of DNA of cells
    and thus block proliferation of cells. These cytotoxic
    properties of alkylating agents are generally used in <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy/chemical-principles/detailed">chemotherapies</a>
    of a number of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/blood-malignancy">haematological</a>
    and other malignancies. Adverse effects of alkylating
    agents include an increased risk of infections and
    long-term development of malignancies, as well as
    toxicity affecting the kidneys and the cardiovascular
    system.</p>
<p><strong>Antimetabolites</strong> (mainly <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy/chemical-principles/detailed">methotrexate</a>
    and azathioprine) are another group of cytotoxic agents
    that are generally used in <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy/chemical-principles/detailed">chemotherapies</a>
    of a number of malignancies. Antimetabolites pervert the
    cell cycle by mimicking the role of normal metabolites
    in cell proliferation and cause cell death by leading to
    faulty products and/or blocked metabolic pathways. Some
    antimetabolites in low dose have immuno-modulating
    properties. Adverse effects of antimetabolites include
    an increased risk of infections and long-term
    development of malignancies, as well as toxicity
    affecting the liver and the gastrointestinal tract.</p>
<p>Oral and maxillofacial conditions where topical and/or
    systemic ‘steroid sparing agents’ are used as sole drug
    or in combination with corticosteroids, for short-
    and/or long-term treatments include</p>
<ul>
    <li>some <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/oral-mucosal-lesion/detailed">oral
            mucosal lesions</a> and mouth ulcers, including
        oral manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus,
        some forms of ulcerative oral lichen planus,
        pemphigus;</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/oral-mucosal-lesion/detailed">mucositis</a>
        , including signs and symptoms of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/tumour/blood-malignancy/more-info">acute
            or chronic host vs graft disease</a>;</li>
    <li>autoimmune conditions such as <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/xerostomia">Sjögren’s
            syndrome</a> or some forms of rheumatoid
        arthritis affecting the <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/jaw-joint">temporomandibular
            (jaw) joint</a>.</li>
</ul>
<h1 id="biologics">‘Biologics’</h1>
<p>This category of immunosuppressants comprises a range of
    proteins that are in different ways engaged in specific
    steps and points of the <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/more-info">inflammatory
        response</a> and / or in the development of
    malignancies. These agents can act as agonists
    (promoters) or antagonists (counterplayers) for specific
    targets, actions and reactions of the immune system. As
    such, this category of immunosuppressant agents holds
    some promise of more targeted effects than
    corticosteroids or other systemic immunosuppressants.
    However, there is currently not yet enough information
    about the long-term safety of most of these agents.</p>
<p><strong>Monoclonal antibodies</strong> target a specific
    receptor and in this way prevent a particular reaction
    pathway of the inflammatory process. Different
    monoclonal antibodies that block</p>
<ul>
    <li>the TNF-<i>α</i> (tumour necrosis factor) receptor
        (infliximab, adalimumab);</li>
    <li>the IgE (immunoglobulin E) receptor (omalizumab);
    </li>
    <li>the CD20 (an antigen on the surface of B cells (a
        type of white blood cell) receptor (rituximab);</li>
    <li>different IL (interleukin, signalling molecules)
        receptors IL-12, IL-4, IL-13, IL-17</li>
</ul>
<p>are in clinical use. Etanercept is a <strong>fusion
        protein</strong> (another type of antibody) that
    blocks the TNF-<i>α</i> receptor. Several types of <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/interferon">interferons</a>
    are an example of a <strong>humane cytokine</strong>
    (signalling molecule) with various up- and
    down-regulating roles in the immune system.</p>
<p>Generally, the adverse effects of these agents are
    allergic reactions, increased risk of infections
    (including reactivation of tuberculosis with
    TNF-<i>α</i> inhibitors), cardiovascular problems,
    triggering of some autoimmune syndromes and an enhanced
    risk to develop (or reactivate) malignancies. These
    adverse effects mandate strict risk/benefit
    considerations and careful monitoring.</p>
<p>Oral and maxillofacial conditions where ‘biological’
    immunosuppressants are used as sole drug or in
    combination with other immunosuppressants, for short-
    and/or long-term treatments include</p>
<ul>
    <li>some <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/oral-mucosal-lesion/detailed">oral
            mucosal lesions</a> and severe mouth ulcers and
        some forms of ulcerative oral lichen planus,
        pemphigus (some of these conditions have been
        reported to respond well to etanercept and
        TNF-<i>α</i> inhibitors);</li>
    <li>oral manifestations of Crohn’s disease, orofacial
        granulomatosis;</li>
    <li>autoimmune conditions such as <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/xerostomia">Sjögren’s
            syndrome</a> (rituximab);</li>
    <li>a specific form of low-grade <a href="/diagnosis-list-tumour-hameatological-malignancy-level1">lymphoma</a>
        affecting mucosal tissue.</li>
</ul>
<h1 id="outlook">Outlook</h1>
<p>There are numerous unanswered questions about the exact
    working mechanisms of many immunosuppressant agents.
    These questions are the focus of much ongoing research:
    obviously, better understanding of these mechanisms will
    provide more focussed / effective treatments, hopefully
    at a reduced burden of adverse effects. For example, one
    such question in search of a convincing answer is the
    following. Immunosuppressant agents that are widely used
    to prevent donor-organ (allograft) rejections are
    tacitly assumed to inhibit rejection mechanisms such as
    cytokine (messenger molecule) release and/or
    proliferation, or blocking cell activation steps.
    However, one may also speculate that a part of their
    role (or perhaps even the main aspect of their role)
    could be the activation / stimulation of some of the
    body’s own immunosuppressant molecules and mechanisms.
    That is an aspect which clearly has an impact on how to
    best make use of such agents, and how to search for new
    and improved such agents. These then could be less blunt
    and much better tailored for particular tasks (ever the
    optimist!).</p>
