---
id: 5c7ab2a413b81a001d83c5e9
uri: treatment/other/new-developments/immunotherapies/detailed
title: Immunotherapies
type: level3
authorship: Authored by Angelika Sebald and David A. Mitchell
order: 0
further_reading_uri: treatment/other/further-reading
updated_at: 2019-07-14T10:27:22Z
created_at: 2019-03-02T16:43:16Z
contents:
  - text: "Clinical trials"
    id: clinical-trials
  - text: "Adverse Effects"
    id: adverse-effects
  - text: "Predicting and monitoring treatment - biomarkers"
    id: predicting-and-monitoring-treatment-biomarkers
  - text: "Some specific immunotherapy aspects of head &amp; neck malignancies"
    id: some-specific-immunotherapy-aspects-of-head-and-neck-malignancies
---

<p>Immunotherapy is a rapidly evolving area in the treatment of
    many malignancies, with therapies based on <a href="/treatment/other/new-developments/immunotherapies/more-info">checkpoint inhibitors and vaccination concepts</a>    making particularly good progress. The importance and potential
    of immunotherapies for the future treatment of many malignancies
    has been recognised not least by the award of the Nobel prize
    for physiology or medicine in 2018 to J.P. Allison (immune
    checkpoint therapies targeting CTLA protein) and T. Honjo
    (targeting the PD-1 protein and receptors) for their ground-breaking
    research into the development of such therapies.</p>
<p>Immunotherapies have had spectacular successes and failures so
    far. Some have recently become more widely used in clinical
    studies; some have become well established in the treatment
    of, for example, melanoma; some are in the pre-clinical stages
    of testing. There is clearly an urgent need to learn and
    understand much more about the intricate regulation and interaction
    networks of the immune system itself, in sickness and in
    health, and its interactions with the various currently available
    immuno-modulating drugs.</p>
<p>At this early stage of clinical development of immunotherapies,
    it seems appropriate to look a little closer into the processes
    of fundamental changes and new drugs entering the mix of
    clinical treatment modalities. We look into the (minefield
    of) basic aspects of clinical trials. Adverse effects (as
    far as known to date) and the lack of suitable biomarkers
    to predict and monitor treatment efficacy and progress need
    to be considered. Finally, some aspects specific to head
    &amp; neck malignancies in relation to immunotherapies are
    discussed. We are well aware that, given the rapid developments
    in biochemistry and microbiology, this page may have to be
    updated or re-written regularly and/or may have to be moved
    to the section on this website dealing with established treatment
    modalities in the not too distant future.</p>
<h1 id="clinical-trials">Clinical trials</h1>
<p>Clinical trials are established procedures to test a treatment
    modality, old or new, for a disease or condition, to help
    decide whether or not it should be used to treat the general
    population in the future (or continue to be used as practised
    in the past). There are a number of general ethical and technical
    issues arising from this approach (see below).</p>
<p>In the assessment of new treatment modalities, there will have
    been extensive testing done <i>in vitro</i> (on microorganisms
    or isolated cells in the laboratory), followed by testing
    on animals before clinical trials involving humans are carried
    out. This staged approach is thought to minimise the risk
    to participants in human clinical trials, but not all risks
    for humans can be excluded in this way. Many clinical trials
    are randomised, with participants picked at random and assigned
    to (often) one of two groups, receiving a particular treatment
    or a placebo, with the participant not knowing to which group
    they were assigned. Many clinical trials, where this is technically
    possible, are ‘double blind’, meaning that neither the participant
    nor the health care team know to which group the participant
    has been assigned. This approach is thought to avoid bias.
    It has to be said, however, that an uncompromising determination
    to exclude everything that may be considered biased, may
    carry additional risks for participants.</p>
<h2>Some aspects about design and execution of clinical trials</h2>
<p>Clinical trials are attempts to evaluate the efficacy and other
    aspects of old and existing treatment modalities in an unbiased
    manner. The approach relies heavily on numerical and statistical
    methods. There are two fundamental aspects to this. First,
    any statistical evaluation, in clinical trials or otherwise,
    can only ever be as good as the data / observation input
    available. Second, it is crucial to keep in mind that even
    if the statistical output / results are definitive-looking
    numbers, the very nature of such statistical analyses is
    probabilistic. One may think of it as some form of numerically
    informed interpretation of the observations of particular
    treatment modalities. The flavour of statistical data analysis
    in clinical trials (or, say social sciences and similar)
    is thus quite different from the statistical analysis of
    uncertainties, variance and other error evaluations of an
    array of measurements in a physics laboratory. From this
    it follows directly that not all clinical treatment modalities
    will be suitable for ‘quantification’ by meaningful statistical
    analysis. Also, where a clinical-trial approach holds promise
    for a meaningful and informative statistical result in principle,
    in practice careful design and execution of a trial is essential
    to obtain any meaningful results.</p>
<p>Planning and execution of clinical trials has two major components,
    closely related to each other. One aspect concerns the size
    of the cohort of participants required for statistically
    (and clinically) meaningful results. This requirement of
    the size of the group is mainly dictated by the expected
    results, if a very clear distinction in a homogeneous group
    of participants is to be expected, or if a trial is looking
    for more subtle effects. In a nutshell, if major effects
    and differences are expected, a smaller number of participants
    (divided into sub-groups, receiving treatment or placebo)
    is needed, whereas a significant (statistically and otherwise)
    result when studying more subtle effects, possibly in a more
    heterogeneous group of participants, requires a larger cohort.
    Any clinical trial has to address these aspects in the planning
    as well as in the execution stages.</p>
<p>Whilst by design meant to exclude, or at least minimise, bias
    in clinical trials, the very nature of how such a trial is
    set up, is a source of bias and error in its own right. What
    should be the inclusion and exclusion criteria for participants
    for a particular trial? What should be the measure(s) / criteria
    to define success or failure of a treatment modality? For
    how long does a trial need to run? Can / should the trial
    be double blinded, or not? Does the trial need to be multi-
    or single-centred? What will qualify as a threshold for terminating
    a trial early? Many more questions come to mind, and the
    somewhat sobering conclusion at this stage has to be the
    following. The design and the execution of clinical trials
    can fall foul to genuine human error (there is a tragic such
    example of otherwise well executed clinical trials about
    adjunct radiotherapy of <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/cancer/mouth-cancer">oropharyngeal cancers</a>    after surgery. These were carried out at a time when it was
    not well enough understood that HPV-positive oropharyngeal
    squamous cell cancers are a different disease from HPV-negative
    ones. In consequence, many patients with HPV-positive malignancies
    were overtreated, with lasting serious quality-of-life issues
    in many cases). The design and the execution of clinical
    trials on the other hand also lends itself to gaming the
    system. For example, a suitably and narrowly defined group
    of participants may demonstrate benefits of a particular
    drug or other treatment modality, but may not at all be representative
    for a corresponding ‘real world’ group of patients.</p>
<p>We certainly do not advocate that clinical trials should be abolished,
    but we wish to emphasise the importance of technical expertise
    in statistics, the need to conduct trials in a responsible
    manner, and not to be fooled to think that just because trials
    ‘produce numbers’ that the meaning and clinical significance
    are in any way simple black-and-white affairs. A critical-thinking
    approach to clinical trials appears more important than ever,
    given that ‘the randomised clinical trial’ has acquired some
    kind of gold-standard status in the medical world. A study
    is not necessarily a good one, just because it happens to
    be technically a randomised clinical trial. Also, it has
    to be recognised that other types of study and assessments
    in medicine do have their place and in some instances are
    more appropriate than clinical trials. Not everything can
    or should be measured or attempted to be expressed in a single
    number. Given the widespread use of clinical trials and all
    the underlying difficulties and problems, it is not surprising
    that there are ongoing debates about best practice with regard
    to statistics and design &amp; execution of clinical trials.</p>
<aside>
    <p>There is a large and growing body of literature in this area.
        If you’d like to read more about the topic, we have compiled
        some <a href="/treatment/other/further-reading">key references and books</a>        .</p>
</aside>
<h2>Ethical considerations about trials</h2>
<p>It is important to understand that the purpose of a clinical
    trial is not primarily the treatment of the participants,
    but to gain medical knowledge for future improved treatment
    of patients. That mission and the means to achieve it in
    itself carries considerable ethical conflicts. Obviously,
    informed consent by all participants to take part in a trial
    is a prerequisite. This sounds obvious and straightforward
    in theory, but is difficult to achieve and to ascertain in
    reality. It certainly requires that all participants understand
    not only the purpose of the trial, but also all known risks
    and benefits of the trialled treatment.</p>
<p>In trials with randomised groups, half of the participants receive
    a placebo. The use of placebos in general is debated: participants
    may be led to believe that they receive a particular drug
    when they are not; receiving a placebo instead of the trialled
    drug may be an advantage or a disadvantage. For example,
    if the studied treatment turns out beneficial, the participants
    in the placebo group will not have received the best standard
    of care. In either case, the use of placebos carries a certain
    element of deceit even though the ’placebo effect’ is well
    recognised in, for example, <a href="/treatment/other/medication/pain/more-info">pain studies</a>.
    Randomisation raises similar ethical issues. Double-blinded
    studies have an additional burden of ethical issues for participants
    and clinicians. There is potentially an enhanced risk for
    the participants associated with the clinicians not knowing
    who is receiving placebo or active drug.</p>
<p>Technical and statistical considerations at the planning and
    implementation stages of a clinical trial seamlessly lead
    to, and overlap with, ethical considerations. It is compulsory
    to keep any risks for participants at an absolute minimum,
    and one of the best ways of assuring that, is to keep the
    size of the trial group at the smallest reasonable numbers
    of participants, so that nobody is needlessly exposed to
    risks. Managing and minimising risk to participants may also
    mandate stopping a trial earlier than anticipated. This may
    be necessary due to unexpected adverse effects, where the
    risks of continuing the trial would outweigh any potential
    benefits. If a study hypothesis is either proven early, or
    is shown to be unprovable or wrong, it would be unethical
    to continue a trial beyond that stage.</p>
<p>Another theme where technical and ethical considerations meet
    is the choice of measure(s) of success / failure. It is often
    said that concentration on metrics is biased (<i>sic</i>!)
    in favour of whatever is easy to enumerate. That, however,
    may not be the only and/or the most relevant measure. For
    example, overall survival time and progression-free survival
    period are the only measure used in the many clinical trials
    on immunotherapies, other considerations such as adverse
    effects or quality-of-life aspects are usually reported but
    not as a prime consideration in judging success or failure.
    This is a typical example where a ‘number’ only tells a part
    of the overall story and where clinical relevance should
    be more in the foreground: what is the point in having a
    marvellously effective drug if in the end it is too toxic
    for the intended clinical applications (<a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/bleomycin">bleomycin</a>,
    originally designed as an <a href="/treatment/other/medication/infection/more-info">antibacterial agent</a>,
    turned out to be too toxic for this purpose but later found
    a niche application in <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy">chemotherapy</a>    and <a href="/treatment/surgery/vascular-abnormalities/detailed">sclerotherapy</a>    due to its cytotoxic properties).  </p>
<p>Table 1 (checkpoint inhibitors) and Table 2 (monoclonal antibodies)
    below list some recent clinical trials in immunotherapy and
    their primary results, illustrating the current general picture
    and including another ethical dilemma: all trials were funded
    by the respective drug manufacturers. The two tables further
    document that clinical trials for head &amp; neck malignancies
    are difficult to arrange when larger numbers of participants
    are needed, in line with other less common conditions. One
    may also read from the tables some bias in the reporting
    of adverse effects (see below) where the most common adverse
    effects are listed, but these often are not the most severe,
    or even fatal, ones (see below). It has to be said, though,
    that the practice with reporting adverse effects of immunotherapies
    is now changing. The slow take-up of systematic and full
    reporting of adverse effects of immunotherapies may also
    reflect some human-factor effects of denial, to some degree:
    it is a disappointment to the medical community if an effective
    medicinal drug turns out to be associated with severe adverse
    effects.</p>
<table>
    <caption><strong>Table 1: Selected clinical trials – checkpoint inhibitors</strong></caption>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th> Drug Trial funded by</th>
            <th> Summary of trial</th>
            <th> Adverse effects</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> pembrolizumab manufacturer of drug</td>
            <td> 132 participants with HNSCC (head and neck squamous
                cell carcinoma), adequate organ function, PD-L1
                positive or negative. Treated for 2 years, until
                cancer progression, or a complete response, or
                withdrawal. Only 26 completed treatments. 6 months
                progression free survival 23 %, 6 month overall
                survival 59 %, median overall survival 8 months.
                Overall response rate higher in PD-L1 positive
                (22 %) and just 4 % in PD-L1 negative.</td>
            <td>
            in 82 participants; most common fatigue, hypothyroidism,
                and decreased appetite 15 withdrawals due to
                adverse effects no treatment related deaths</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> pembrolizumab manufacturer of drug</td>
            <td> randomised trial for non-small cell lung cancer after
                chemotherapy, with metastasis and some malignant
                cells producing PD-L1. 1034 participants three
                groups: 345 usual dose of pembrolizumab, 346
                higher dose of pembrolizumab, 343 had docetaxel
                (chemotherapy). Overall survival 10.4 months
                for usual dose, 12.7 months for higher dose,
                8.5 months for docetaxel. If high positive for
                PD-L1, pembrolizumab more effective for overall
                survival but no difference in progression-free
                survival.</td>
            <td> most common decreased appetite, fatigue, nausea,
                and hypothyroidism fewer adverse effects caused
                by pembrolizumab than by docetaxel 6 pembrolizumab-treatment
                related deaths</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> chemotherapy plus ipilimumab manufacturer of drug</td>
            <td>
            randomised trial of 502 participants with stage 3
                or 4 advanced melanoma, with no previous treatment
                in two groups: 250 chemotherapy (dacarbazine)
                plus ipilimumab, 252 only chemotherapy. Only
                92 participants completed four treatment cycles
                of combined therapy, 165 for chemotherapy only.
                Most commonly cancer worsening and serious ipilimumab-related
                adverse effects. Average overall survival just
                over 11 months (combination therapy) or 9 months
                (chemotherapy only). Survival after 3 years was
                21 % (combination therapy) and 12 % (chemotherapy
                only). Survival after 5 years was 18 % and 9
                %.</td>
            <td> more cases of severe adverse effects in the ipilimumab
                plus chemotherapy group than in the chemotherapy
                only group (56.3 % vs 27.5 %) most common immune
                system related adverse events such as elevated
                liver function, and diarrhoea</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> comparison ipilimumab and pembrolizumab   manufacturer
                of drug</td>
            <td> 834 participants with advanced melanoma; 278 ipilimumab
                and 279 pembrolizumab every 2 weeks, 277 pembrolizumab
                every 3 weeks. Treatment abandoned if the cancer
                progressed. 6 months progression-free survival
                26.5 % for the ipilimumab group, 47.3 % for the
                pembrolizumab every 2 weeks, and 46.4 % for the
                pembrolizumab every 3 weeks groups. 12 months
                the overall survival 58.2 % for the ipilimumab
                group, 74.1 % for the pembrolizumab every 2 weeks
                group, and 68.4 % for pembrolizumab every 3 weeks
                group.</td>
            <td> pembrolizumab adverse effects less severe than for
                ipilimumab fewer participants terminating treatment
                early for pembrolizumab</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> nivolumab   manufacturer of drug</td>
            <td> randomised trial with 361 participants with head
                &amp; neck squamous cell carcinoma, with progression
                or recurrence within 6 months of (platinum) chemotherapy;
                two groups: 240 nivolumab, 121 standard treatment
                (docetaxel or cetuximab). Median overall survival
                7.5 months (nivolumab) and 5.1 months for standard
                treatment; both groups median progression free
                survival of around 2 months.</td>
            <td> less severe adverse effects in the nivolumab group
                than in the chemotherapy group common adverse
                effects in the nivolumab group fatigue, nausea,
                and skin rash 2 nivolumab-treatment related deaths</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> nivolumab   manufacturer of drug</td>
            <td> randomised trial with 272 participants with non-small
                cell lung cancer with progression or metastasis;
                in two groups: half nivolumab, half docetaxel
                (chemotherapy). Overall survival 9.2 months for
                nivolumab group, 6 months for docetaxel group.</td>
            <td>
            less severe adverse effects in the nivolumab group
                than in the chemotherapy group common adverse
                effects in the nivolumab group fatigue, decreased
                appetite, and physical weakness</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<table>
    <caption><strong>Table 2: Selected clinical trials – monoclonal antibodies</strong></caption>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th> Drug Trial funded by</th>
            <th> Summary of trial</th>
            <th> Adverse effects</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> chemotherapy (irinotecan) and cetuximab manufacturer
                of drug</td>
            <td> 329 participants with bowel cancer, after chemotherapy
                and progressing; two groups: 219 combination
                treatment,111 had only cetuximab. Overall response
                rate 22.9 % with combination treatment,10.8 %
                with cetuximab only.</td>
            <td> adverse effects were more common in the combination-therapy
                group (65.1 % <i>vs</i> 43.5 %) most common adverse
                effects diarrhoea, physical weakness, acne-like
                rash</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> chemotherapy and cetuximab manufacturer of drug</td>
            <td>
            130 participants with advanced bowel cancer and the
                normal K-RAS gene (as previous trial demonstrated
                that cetuximab does not work with mutated K-RAS
                gene). All received 12 weeks of chemotherapy
                and cetuximab. Then 78 had intermittent chemotherapy
                and intermittent cetuximab, and 91 had intermittent
                chemotherapy and continuous cetuximab. Median
                progression free survival was 12.2 months in
                the intermittent group, and 14.3 months in the
                continuous group, with median overall survival
                being 16 months, and 17.5 months.</td>
            <td> adverse effects were similar in each group most common
                effects skin rash, diarrhoea, and physical weakness
                  3 treatment-related deaths</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> chemo-radiotherapy and cetuximab manufacturer of
                drug</td>
            <td> randomised trial with 258 participants with non-spread
                oesophageal cancer. All given chemotherapy and
                5 weeks of radiotherapy, half were also given
                cetuximab. Progression free survival at 24 weeks
                was 66.4 % with cetuximab and 76.9 % without
                cetuximab. Median overall survival was 22.1 months
                with cetuximab and 25.4 months without cetuximab.</td>
            <td>
            more cases of adverse effects in the cetuximab group
                most common effects skin problems, fatigue and
                dysphagia 3 treatment-related deaths</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
<h1 id="adverse-effects">Adverse Effects</h1>
<p>After decades of use, the serious short- and long-term adverse
    effects of <a href="/treatment/radiotherapy">radiotherapy</a>    and <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy">chemotherapy</a> in
    the treatment of malignancies are well documented and reasonably
    well understood (with some notable exceptions). Both radio-
    and chemotherapy have been denoted as blunt agents that do
    not sufficiently discriminate between healthy and diseased
    cells and thus also damage healthy tissues. One of the hopes
    associated with the development of immunotherapies is a lower
    burden of adverse effects. It is too early for a comprehensive
    picture of any long-term adverse effects the currently used
    immunotherapy drugs may have. Patterns of acute and medium-term
    adverse effects are now emerging, and are increasingly reported
    in the literature.</p>
<p>Immunotherapies are systemic treatments and thus share some aspects
    of ‘bluntness’ with the <a href="/treatment/chemotherapy">traditional chemotherapy drugs</a>.
    Traditional chemotherapy drugs are cytotoxic agents that
    do harm predominantly to cell lines with fast-growth characteristics,
    such as malignant tumours but also have cytotoxic effects
    elsewhere in the body, especially on tissues with a healthy
    rapid turnover, such as the oral mucosa. The working principles
    of immunotherapy agents are fundamentally different from
    those of traditional chemotherapy agents, and instead rely
    on interfering with the body’s immune system and trying to
    activate these body-defence mechanisms against malignant
    cells. The immune system operates all over the body. Accordingly,
    adverse effects related to the immune system can occur everywhere
    in the body. It is perhaps telling that recently the range
    of adverse effects of immunotherapies has been given a name,
    immune related adverse effects, IREAs.</p>
<p>Immune related adverse effects are common. IREAs affect up to
    90 % of people treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors
    and occur in 70 % of monoclonal antibody treatments. Most
    of the less severe effects concern skin and gut, the more
    severe IREAs typically involve the digestive tract and /
    or the endocrine system. Some IREAs are irreversible. A period
    of 3 to 6 months for the occurrence of adverse effects is
    typically reported, but it is not yet possible to rule out
    delayed effects. The risk of adverse effects seems to be
    correlated with dose. A well-known pattern from traditional
    radio- and chemotherapy treatment schemes emerges also for
    immunotherapies: multi-agent and/or multi-modality treatment
    schemes carry an increased risk for more severe adverse effects.</p>
<p>The symptoms of many IREAs resemble those of autoimmune conditions,
    such as arthritis or <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/salivary-gland-problems/detailed">Sjögren’s syndrome</a>.
    However, in most cases none of the antibodies identified
    in specific <a href="/diagnosis/tests/blood-tests">blood tests for autoimmune conditions</a>    are observed. It is not yet clear if pre-existing autoimmune
    conditions are particularly negatively impacted by immunotherapies.
    This is of practical importance because many autoimmune conditions,
    including various forms arthritis and type I diabetes, are
    common conditions.</p>
<h2>Current picture of immune related adverse effects</h2>
<p>The most commonly reported adverse effect is fatigue, which is
    difficult to assess and to relate to its exact causes. Fatigue
    may be a sign of tumour progression, it may occur as a secondary
    effect of some other IREA (for example, effects on the endocrine
    system, see below), or it may even be some specific form
    of chronic fatigue syndrome.</p>
<p>IREAs afflict various organs and tissues, including</p>
<ul>
    <li>skin and mucosa - these are common effects. The most common
        skin effects are erythema (rash) and vitiligo (loss of
        pigment from areas of skin), with <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/soft">skin necrosis</a>        less common. <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/xerostomia">Xerostomia (dry mouth)</a>        occurs in approximately 5 % of treatments. It may occur
        as a direct effect on the mucosa, or may be a symptom
        of an autoimmune condition, <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/salivary-gland-problems/detailed">Sjögren’s syndrome</a>        affecting the salivary glands, or variants of it;</li>
    <li>gastrointestinal tract - these are common effects. Diarrhoea
        and colitis (inflammation of the long section of the
        bowel) need to be distinguished. Diarrhoea of a range
        of severity affects up to 30 % of patients. Colitis under
        immunotherapies can be severe and resembles Crohn’s disease
        (an inflammatory bowel condition that sometimes is of
        autoimmune origin);</li>
    <li>endocrine system – approximately 10 % of patients develop
        adverse effects concerning the endocrine system (thyroid
        gland, pituitary gland, adrenal glands) of variable severity
        of lack of function of the respective gland(s). These
        IRAEs are often permanent and may be difficult to diagnose
        as dysfunctions of the endocrine glands are accompanied
        by multiple and often non-specific symptoms. Acute failure
        of the adrenal glands is an emergency, leading to potentially
        fatal metabolic dysfunction if untreated;</li>
    <li>liver and lungs - these organs are less commonly affected,
        but immune-related hepatitis (5 % of patients) and in
        particular immune-related pneumonitis (1 % of patients)
        are serious adverse effects, potentially life threatening;</li>
    <li>arthritis (inflammation of joints) and arthralgia (joint
        pain) - reported in approximately 5 % of patients;</li>
    <li>eyes and nervous system - a few cases of inflammatory eye
        conditions (uveitis, conjunctivitis, episcleritis, orbital
        inflammation) and neurological conditions (meningitis,
        transverse myelitis, posterior reversible encephalopathy
        syndrome) have been reported;</li>
    <li>kidneys - kidney failure, including several inflammatory
        kidney conditions, is reported in approximately 1 % of
        patients;  </li>
    <li>blood system – a range of disorders have been reported, but
        cytopenia (lack of mature blood cells; a common adverse
        effect of chemo- and radiotherapy) seems less commonly
        associated with immunotherapies.  </li>
</ul>
<h2>Management of immune related adverse effects</h2>
<p>To date, no effective methods to prevent or predict adverse effects
    of immunotherapies have been described. Some of the more
    severe adverse effects (see above) mandate extensive diagnostic
    explorations.</p>
<p>Any management of the symptoms of IRAEs heavily relies on
    <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">steroids</a> for their <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">anti-inflammatory and general immunosuppressive properties</a>.
        These can be <a href="/treatment/other/medication/delivery">administered topically or systemically</a>,
        with some less severe IRAEs within the remit of local
        steroid applications. Some more severe IRAEs are refractory
        to systemic steroids and may require treatment with a
        <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">TNF (tumour necrosis factor) inhibitor</a>        or other potent <a href="/treatment/other/medication/miscellaneous/immunosuppressants">immunosuppressive agents</a>        to curb the inflammatory response. Some serious adverse
        effects may require termination of immunotherapy. Any
        deficiencies resulting from dysfunction of endocrine
        glands require replacement therapies for whatever hormones
        are insufficiently produced, alongside careful monitoring.
         </p>
<p>Much of the use of <a href="/treatment/other/medication/inflammation/detailed">anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive agents</a>    in managing IRAEs is informed by their established use in
    treating autoimmune conditions. However, IRAEs and general
    autoimmune conditions are not identical, even if some symptoms
    may be very similar. The use of immunosuppressive agents
    to mitigate the adverse effects of (immune-activating) immunotherapies
    presents a dilemma. It is currently not clear if, how, and
    to what extent immunosuppressive agents negatively interfere
    with ongoing immunotherapies and/or what effects interrupted
    immunotherapy schemes might have.</p>
<p>Some immunotherapy treatments are already showing very good efficacy
    in treating some malignancies, for example in the treatment
    of melanoma. It is, therefore easy to predict that growing
    numbers of people will be treated with this type of drug,
    will survive for longer or will be cured and thus will present
    with lasting and/or late adverse effects of these treatment
    schemes (somewhat reminiscent of radiotherapy and late
    <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/necrosis/hard/more-info">osteoradionecrosis</a>). As some of these effects are difficult
        to diagnose and to distinguish from other causes (including
        recurrence of malignancy in some instances), now is the
        time for health systems to prepare for increased long-term
        needs to monitor and manage such treatment-related conditions.</p>
<h1 id="predicting-and-monitoring-treatment-biomarkers">Predicting and monitoring treatment - biomarkers</h1>
<p>A major hurdle to a wider and more successful use of immunotherapies
    is the low response rate to treatment; only a small sub-group
    of patients benefits from immunotherapies. For example, response
    rates as low as 20 % have been reported for <a href="/diagnosis/a-z/cancer/mouth-cancer">oral squamous cell carcinoma</a>.
    Currently there are no biomarkers known for the prediction
    of responsive conditions, or the monitoring of treatment
    over time. This is obviously a subject of intense research.</p>
<p>One biomarker that has been explored in some detail is the
    <a href="/treatment/other/new-developments/immunotherapies/more-info">PD-L1 ligand</a> (which activates the T-cell inhibiting PD-1
        receptor) but it does not provide reliable monitoring
        or prediction. It has been noted that a high concentration
        of tumour-infiltrating cells (a so-called immune-inflamed
        tumour profile) correlates with better survival, and
        so specific cells might be monitored as indicators of
        response to treatment. However, it is not clear if this
        characteristic also correlates with response to immunotherapies.
        A recent suggestion is based on the observation that
        especially tumour types with a greater mutation burden
        (melanoma, high mutation rates when associated with UV-exposure;
        or some types of lung cancer, high mutation rates when
        associated with smoking) tend to respond well to immunotherapies,
        suggesting that the mutation burden of a tumour and/or
        antigens could serve as biomarkers.</p>
<p>For the time being, no biomarkers that could help to identify
    and predict response to immunotherapies have been identified.
    Numerous ideas and hypotheses are being explored. The currently
    available information strongly suggests that there will not
    be a single predictive biomarker, but that any reliable predictions
    will have to simultaneously consider different components.
    This is likely to include DNA sequencing of the tumour to
    identify specific genetic mutations, RNA sequencing for obtaining
    finger-printing of the immune-system phenotype, PD-L1 and/or
    other ligand and/or antigen characterisation as descriptors
    of the tumour microenvironment. Furthermore, such investigations
    aim at a moving target as both host physiology and tumour
    metabolism co-evolve over time, thus repeated investigations
    will be needed. If and how such requirements will be practical
    and can be embedded in clinical practice remains to be seen.
     </p>
<h1 id="some-specific-immunotherapy-aspects-of-head-and-neck-malignancies">Some specific immunotherapy aspects of head &amp; neck malignancies</h1>
<p>In trying to relate this promise of an effective new treatment
    to head &amp; neck cancers there are some areas of promise.
    The search for biomarkers actually demonstrates that strong
    immunomodulatory / immunosuppressive characteristics are
    typical. These may make good candidates for immunotherapy
    when targeting / activating the PD-1 receptor or its ligand
    PD-L1 (where present / possible).</p>
<p>Pronounced escapism from immune surveillance may be related to
    anatomical location in the midst of a dense lymphatic network
    (the logic being that only tumours that are already good
    at hiding from immune surveillance have a chance to develop
    / grow in this location) / may make for a particular tumour
    microenvironment / may account for a particularly dynamic
    evolution of tumour metabolism.</p>
<p>One can see the immediate problem in relation to the number of
    times the word ‘may’ has been used in the above paragraph.</p>
<p>Head and neck cancers are extremely heterogeneous conditions
    (and certainly not simply HPV related in the way most cervical
    cancers are), they vary in behaviour not only in histopathological
    terms but in relation to specific anatomical sites. Therefore
    they break down to small numbers of closely related tumour
    types. This means that it is not likely that large clinical
    trials will be feasible for reasonable narrowly defined conditions
    (see discourse above), the more feasible approach will be
    careful observational studies.</p>
<p>Some rather specific immunosuppressive properties have been reported
    where there seem to be some correlations between immunosuppressive
    characteristics and particular genes / mutations. It is not
    yet clear what (if any) the causal relationships are. Tumour
    genomics is, therefore particularly high up on the to-do
    list of research into this kind / location of carcinoma.</p>
<p>In addition, very practical ethical considerations will apply.
    There have been suggestions that pre-treatment with low dose
    radio/chemotherapy promoting tumour bed inflammation and
    the mutations induced by these may make ‘dynamically evolving’
    tumours more susceptible to immunotherapies. This would be
    the ethical equivalent of delivering sub-optimal treatment
    to malignancies potentially curable by conventional means
    in order to conduct a prospective randomised clinical trial
    of something that may – or may not be ‘better’ (in whatever
    way the trial designers decide).</p>
<p>At the time of writing, immunotherapy for the curative treatment
    of head and neck cancers is a source of fascination for scientists
    and possibly concern for clinicians. It seems unlikely to
    be of relevance to most head and neck cancer patients in
    the immediate future without that dichotomy being fully addressed
    and resolved.</p>
