---
id: 5d29be3b5a230b001c8ddec2
uri: treatment/surgery/postoperative-problems/lower-arm
title: Lower arm
type: page
authorship: Authored by David A. Mitchell;Proof-read/edited by Angelika Sebald
order: 0
further_reading_uri: treatment/surgery/further-reading
updated_at: 2019-07-14T10:29:18Z
created_at: 2019-07-13T11:19:23Z
---

<p>Treatments of postoperative problems affecting the lower arm
    include</p>
<ul>
    <li>The usual maxillofacial reasons for surgery on the lower
        arm will be harvesting of a <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">radial forearm free flap</a>        (or much less often an ulnar forearm flap). Altered appearance
        and minor sensation disturbances are the major issues.
        Ischaemia of the thumb or fracture of the radius are
        very rare.</li>
    <li>Scars. The lower arm is visible in many cultures and there
        will be visible scars. Treatment ranges from scar modification
        using compression, massage, silicone gels and sheets
        to formal <a href="/treatment/surgery/damage/more-info">scar revision</a>.</li>
    <li>If a radial forearm flap has been raised the radial artery
        is removed as part of the flap. Critical ischaemia is
        very rare but if this does occur, the radial artery is
        <a href="/treatment/surgery/reconstruction">reconstructed</a>        with a vein of PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene, a synthetic
        polymer) graft.</li>
    <li><a href="/diagnosis/a-z/neuropathies">Altered sensation</a>        . The superficial branch of the radial nerve is manipulated
        during the dissection to raise the radial flap. It is
        quite common to have some altered sensation over the
        area of the thumb base (thenar eminence). While irritating,
        this can usually be overcome with counter-irritation
        (rubbing gently or with a toothbrush) and time.</li>
    <li>Grip strength. Unless a fracture of the radius has occurred
        (and if a part of the radius has been harvested to create
        an osseocutaneous flap, the radius should be prophylactically
        plated) grip strength is returned to normal with simple
        <a href="/help-selfhelp-physiotherapy-preamble">physiotherapy exercises</a>        of the kind used in improving the symptoms of arthritis
        of the hand.</li>
</ul>
