---
id: 5df39f9f6ea2f3001cb4149f
uri: help/non-oral-food/further-reading
title: Non-oral food intake
type: further
order: 0
updated_at: 2019-12-15T11:16:56Z
created_at: 2019-12-13T14:26:39Z
contents:
  - text: "Textbooks"
    id: textbooks
  - text: "Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)"
    id: journal-articles-peer-reviewed-literature
  - text: "Electronic resources"
    id: electronic-resources
---

<h1 id="textbooks">Textbooks</h1>
<p>K. Thankappan, S. Iver and J.R. Menon (eds.). Dysphagia
    Management in Head and Neck Cancers: A Manual and Atlas.
    Springer, 2018.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Includes chapters on tube feeding.</p>
</aside>
<p>R. Rolandelli (ed.). Clinical Nutrition: Enteral and Tube
    Feeding, Volume 1 (4<sup>th</sup> ed.). Elsevier
    Saunders, 2005.</p>
<aside>
    <p>Deals with all aspects of enteral feeding; not
        specifically about head and neck cancer, but
        includes a dedicated chapter.</p>
</aside>
<h1 id="journal-articles-peer-reviewed-literature">Journal articles (peer reviewed literature)</h1>
<p>J. Ojo et al. The Effect of Enteral Tube Feeding on
    Patients’ Health-Related Quality of Life: A Systematic
    Review. <i>Nutrients</i> <strong>1</strong>, 1046
    (2019).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Conclude that a better / wider / deeper understanding
        of all aspects is needed.</p>
</aside>
<p>G.F. Williams et al. Patients' experience of enteral
    feeding following (chemo) radiotherapy for head and neck
    cancer: A qualitative study. <i>Clinical Nutrition</i>
    <strong>38</strong>, 1382-1389 (2019).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Some common patterns, but altogether highly
        individual experiences.</p>
</aside>
<p>P. Savino. Knowledge of Constituent Ingredients in
    Enteral Nutrition Formulas Can Make a Difference in
    Patient Response to Enteral Feeding. <i>Nutrition in
        Clinical Practice</i> <strong>33</strong>, 90-98
    (2018).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Some of the common causes for intolerance to enteral
        feeding formula preparations are discussed, such as
        high concentration of corn syrup.</p>
</aside>
<p>E. Silander et al. Impact of prophylactic percutaneous
    endoscopic gastrostomy on malnutrition and quality of
    life in patients with head and neck cancer – a
    randomized study. <i>Head &amp; Neck</i>
    <strong>34</strong>, 1-9 (2012).</p>
<aside>
    <p>In favour of generous use of PEG (in contrast to
        following study).</p>
</aside>
<p>S. Langmore et al. Does PEG Use Cause Dysphagia in Head
    and Neck Cancer Patients? <i>Dysphagia</i>
    <strong>27</strong>, 251-259 (2012).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Suggests that dependence on PEG use may lead to
        adverse swallowing ability outcomes because of
        decreased use of the swallowing musculature.</p>
</aside>
<p>S. White and L. Brereton. Examining the role of patient
    values in decisions about long-term enteral feeding: A
    qualitative study. <i>Clinical Nutrition</i>
    <strong>37</strong>, 1o46-1052 (2018).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Mixed feelings reported, about decisions and decision
        making.</p>
</aside>
<p>E. Bobo. Reemergence of Blenderized Tube Feedings.
    Exploring the Evidence. <i>Nutrition in Clinical
        Practice</i> <strong>31</strong>, 730-735 (2016).
</p>
<p>H. Carter et al. Blended tube feeding prevalence,
    efficacy, and safety: What does the literature say?
    <i>Journal of the American Association of Nurse
        Practioners</i> <strong>30</strong>, 150-157 (2018).
</p>
<p>C.R. Parrish. Blenderized Tube Feeding: Suggested
    Guidelines to Clinicians. <i>Practical
        Gastroenterology</i> <strong>136</strong>, 58-66
    (2014).</p>
<p>J. Coad et al. Blended foods for tube-fed children: a
    safe and realistic option? A rapid review of the
    evidence. <i>Archives of Disease in Childhood</i>
    <strong>102</strong>, 274-278 (2017).</p>
<p>G. Phillips. Patient and carer experience of blended diet
    via gastrostomy: a qualitative study. <i>Journal of
        Human Nutrition and Dietetics</i>
    <strong>32</strong>, 391-399 (2018).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Highlights the benefits of blended diet via
        gastrostomy as an alternative to commercial formulae
        and calls for more research to develop general
        guidelines.</p>
</aside>
<p>E. Hazzard et al. Healthcare Professionals’ Perceptions
    of Feeding Tube Practices for Patients with Head and
    Neck Cancer across 4 International Radiation Oncology
    Departments. <i>Journal of Parenteral and Enteral
        Nutrition</i>, in press (2019).</p>
<aside>
    <p>The debate about best timing of placement and removal
        of feeding tubes continues…</p>
</aside>
<p>S. McClelland et al. Prophylactic versus reactive
    gastrostomy tube placement in advanced head and neck
    cancer treated with definitive chemoradiotherapy: A
    systematic review. <i>Oral Oncology</i> 87, 77-81
    (2018).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Advocate early PEG placement…</p>
</aside>
<p>J. Hausmann et al. Prophylactic percutaneous endoscopic
    gastrostomy in patients with head and neck cancer:
    Influence on nutritional status, utilisation rate and
    complications. <i>The International Journal of Clinical
        Practice</i>, in press (2019).</p>
<aside>
    <p>… and a more critical view of early placement of a
        PEG.</p>
</aside>
<p>M.K. Montes de Oca et al. Head and neck cancer PEG site
    metastases: Association with PEG placement method.
    <i>Head &amp; N</i>e<i>ck</i> <strong>41</strong>,
    1508-1516 (2019).</p>
<aside>
    <p>Good overview of current thinking about this unique
        type of seeding of metastases.</p>
</aside>
<p>K.H. Giles et at. Recommended European Society of
    Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition protein and energy
    intakes and weight loss in patients with head and neck
    cancer. <i>Head &amp; Neck</i> <strong>38</strong>,
    1248-1257 (2016).</p>
<h1 id="electronic-resources">Electronic resources</h1>
<p>European Society of Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition <a href="http://www.espen.org">www.espen.org</a></p>
